e there realized that by limiting their
sample to their own portfolio, they were producing a study not of
startup trends but of their own biases when selecting companies.I predict we'll see this technique used more in the future.  The
information needed to conduct such studies is increasingly available.
Data about who applies for things is usually closely guarded by the
organizations selecting them, but nowadays data about who gets
selected is often publicly available to anyone who takes the trouble
to aggregate it.
Notes[1]
This technique wouldn't work if the selection process looked
for different things from different types of applicants—for
example, if an employer hired men based on their ability but women
based on their appearance.[2]
As Paul Buchheit points out, First Round excluded their most 
successful investment, Uber, from the study.  And while it 
makes sense to exclude outliers from some types of studies, 
studies of returns from startup investing, which is all about 
hitting outliers, are not one of them.
Thanks to Sam Altman, Jessica Livingston, and Geoff Ralston for reading
drafts of this.



Want to start a startup?  Get funded by
Y Combinator.




March 2008, rev. June 2008Technology tends to separate normal from natural.  Our bodies
weren't designed to eat the foods that people in rich countries eat, or
to get so little exercise.  
There may be a similar problem with the way we work: 
a normal job may be as bad for us intellectually as white flour
or sugar is for us physically.I began to suspect this after spending several years working 
with startup founders.  I've now worked with over 200 of them, and I've
noticed a definite difference between programmers working on their
own startups and those working for large organizations.
I wouldn't say founders seem happier, necessarily;
starting a startup can be very stressful. Maybe the best way to put
it is to say that they're happier in the sense that your body is
happier during a long run than sitting on a sofa eating
doughnuts.Though they're statistically abnormal, startup founders seem to be
working in a way that's more natural for humans.I was in Africa last year and saw a lot of animals in the wild that
I'd only seen in zoos before. It was remarkable how different they
seemed. Particularly lions. Lions in the wild seem about ten times
more alive. They're like different animals. I suspect that working
for oneself feels better to humans in much the same way that living
in the wild must feel better to a wide-ranging predator like a lion.
Life in a zoo is easier, but it isn't the life they were designed
for.
TreesWhat's so unnatural about working for a big company?  The root of
the problem is that humans weren't meant to work in such large
groups.Another thing you notice when you see animals in the wild is that
each species thrives in groups of a certain size.  A herd of impalas
might have 100 adults; baboons maybe 20; lions rarely 10.  Humans
also seem designed to work in groups, and what I've read about
hunter-gatherers accords with research on organizations and my own
experience to suggest roughly what the ideal size is: groups of 8
work well; by 20 they're getting hard to manage; and a group of 50
is really unwieldy.
[1]
Whatever the upper limit is, we are clearly not meant to work in
groups of several hundred.  And yet—for reasons having more
to do with technology than human nature—a great many people
work for companies with hundreds or thousands of employees.Companies know groups that large wouldn't work, so they divide
themselves into units small enough to work together.  But to
coordinate these they have to introduce something new: bosses.These smaller groups are always arranged in a tree structure.  Your
boss is the point where your group attaches to the tree.  But when
you use this trick for dividing a large group into smaller ones,
something strange happens that I've never heard anyone mention
explicitly.  In the group one level up from yours, your boss
represents your entire group.  A group of 10 managers is not merely
a group of 10 people working together in the usual way.  It's really
a group of groups.  Which means for a group of 10 managers to work
together as if they were simply a group of 10 individuals, the group
working for each manager would have to work as if they were a single
person—the workers and manager would each share only one
person's worth of freedom between them.In practice a group of people are never able to act as if they were
one person.  But in a large organization divided into groups in
this way, the pressure is always in that direction.  Each group
tries its best to work as if it were the small group of individuals
that humans were designed to work in.  That was the point of creating
it.  And when you propagate that constraint, the result is that
each person gets freedom of action in inverse proportion to the
size of the entire tree.
[2]Anyone who's worked for a large organization has felt this.  You
can feel the difference between working for a company with 100
employees and one with 10,000, even if your group has only 10 people.
Corn SyrupA group of 10 people within a large organization is a kind of fake
tribe.  The number of people you interact with is about right.  But
something is missing: individual initiative.  Tribes of hunter-gatherers
have much more freedom.  The leaders have a little more power than other
members of the tribe, but they don't generally tell them what to
do and when the way a boss can.It's not your boss's fault.  The real problem is that in the group
above you in the hierarchy, your entire group is one virtual person.
Your boss is just the way that constraint is imparted to you.So working in a group of 10 people within a large organization feels
both right and wrong at the same time.   On the surface it feels
like the kind of group you're meant to work in, but something major
is missing.  A job at a big company is like high fructose corn
syrup: it has some of the qualities of things you're meant to like,
but is disastrously lacking in others.Indeed, food is an excellent metaphor to explain what's wrong with
the usual sort of job.For example, working for a big company is the default thing to do,
at least for programmers.  How bad could it be?  Well, food shows
that pretty clearly.  If you were dropped at a random point in
America today, nearly all the food around you would be bad for you.
Humans were not designed to eat white flour, refined sugar, high
fructose corn syrup, and hydrogenated vegetable oil.  And yet if
you analyzed the contents of the average grocery store you'd probably
find these four ingredients accounted for most of the calories.
"Normal" food is terribly bad for you.  The only people who eat
what humans were actually designed to eat are a few Birkenstock-wearing
weirdos in Berkeley.If "normal" food is so bad for us, why is it so common?  There are
two main reasons. One is that it has more immediate appeal.  You
may feel lousy an hour after eating that pizza, but eating the first
couple bites feels great.  The other is economies of scale.
Producing junk food scales; producing fresh vegetables doesn't.
Which means (a) junk food can be very cheap, and (b) it's worth
spending a lot to market it.If people have to choose between something that's cheap, heavily
marketed, and appealing in the short term, and something that's
expensive, obscure, and appealing in the long term, which do you
think most will choose?It's the same with work.  The average MIT graduate wants to work
at Google or Microsoft, because it's a recognized brand, it's safe,
and they'll get paid a good salary right away.  It's the job
equivalent of the pizza they had for lunch.  The drawbacks will
only become apparent later, and then only in a vague sense of
malaise.And founders and early employees of startups, meanwhile, are like
the Birkenstock-wearing weirdos of Berkeley:  though a tiny minority
of the population, they're the ones living as humans are meant to.
In an artificial world, only extremists live naturally.
ProgrammersThe restrictiveness of big company jobs is particularly hard on
programmers, because the essence of programming is to build new
things.  Sales people make much the same pitches every day; support
people answer much the same questions; but once you've written a
piece of code you don't need to write it again.  So a programmer
working as programmers are meant to is always making new things.
And when you're part of an organization whose structure gives each
person freedom in inverse proportion to the size of the tree, you're
going to face resistance when you do something new.This seems an inevitable consequence of bigness.  It's true even
in the smartest companies.  I was talking recently to a founder who
considered starting a startup right out of college, but went to
work for Google instead because he thought he'd learn more there.
He didn't learn as much as he expected.  Programmers learn by doing,
and most of the things he wanted to do, he couldn't—sometimes
because the company wouldn't let him, but often because the company's
code wouldn't let him.  Between the drag of legacy code, the overhead
of doing development in such a large organization, and the restrictions
imposed by interfaces owned by other groups, he could only try a
fraction of the things he would have liked to.  He said he has
learned much more in his own startup, despite the fact that he has
to do all the company's errands as well as programming, because at
least when he's programming he can do whatever he wants.An obstacle downstream propagates upstream.  If you're not allowed
to implement new ideas, you stop having them.  And vice versa: when
you can do whatever you want, you have more ideas about what to do.
So working for yourself makes your brain more powerful in the same
way a low-restriction exhaust system makes an engine more powerful.Working for yourself doesn't have to mean starting a startup, of
course.  But a programmer deciding between a regular job at a big
company and their own startup is probably going to learn more doing
the startup.You can adjust the amount of freedom you get by scaling the size
of company you work for.  If you start the company, you'll have the
most freedom.  If you become one of the first 10 employees you'll
have almost as much freedom as the founders.  Even a company with
100 people will feel different from one with 1000.Working for a small company doesn't ensure freedom.  The tree
structure of large organizations sets an upper bound on freedom,
not a lower bound.  The head of a small company may still choose
to be a tyrant.  The point is that a large organization is compelled
by its structure to be one.
ConsequencesThat has real consequences for both organizations and individuals.
One is that companies will inevitably slow down as they grow larger,
no matter how hard they try to keep their startup mojo.  It's a
consequence of the tree structure that every large organization is
forced to adopt.Or rather, a large organization could only avoid slowing down if
they avoided tree structure.  And since human nature limits the
size of group that can work together, the only way I can imagine
for larger groups to avoid tree structure would be to have no
structure: to have each group actually be independent, and to work
together the way components of a market economy do.That might be worth exploring.  I suspect there are already some
highly partitionable businesses that lean this way.  But I don't
know any technology companies that have done it.There is one thing companies can do short of structuring themselves
as sponges:  they can stay small.  If I'm right, then it really
pays to keep a company as small as it can be at every stage.
Particularly a technology company.  Which means it's doubly important
to hire the best people.  Mediocre hires hurt you twice: they get
less done, but they also make you big, because you need more of
them to solve a given problem.For individuals the upshot is the same: aim small.  It will always
suck to work for large organizations, and the larger the organization,
the more it will suck.In an essay I wrote a couple years ago 
I advised graduating seniors
to work for a couple years for another company before starting their
own.  I'd modify that now.  Work for another company if you want
to, but only for a small one, and if you want to start your own
startup, go ahead.The reason I suggested college graduates not start startups immediately
was that I felt most would fail.  And they will.  But ambitious
programmers are better off doing their own thing and failing than
going to work at a big company.  Certainly they'll learn more.  They
might even be better off financially.  A lot of people in their
early twenties get into debt, because their expenses grow even
faster than the salary that seemed so high when they left school.
At least if you start a startup and fail your net worth will be
zero rather than negative.  
[3]We've now funded so many different types of founders that we have
enough data to see patterns, and there seems to be no benefit from
working for a big company.  The people who've worked for a few years
do seem better than the ones straight out of college, but only
because they're that much older.The people who come to us from big companies often seem kind of
conservative.  It's hard to say how much is because big companies
made them that way, and how much is the natural conservatism that
made them work for the big companies in the first place.  But
certainly a large part of it is learned.  I know because I've seen
it burn off.Having seen that happen so many times is one of the things that
convinces me that working for oneself, or at least for a small
group, is the natural way for programmers to live.  Founders arriving
at Y Combinator often have the downtrodden air of refugees.  Three
months later they're transformed: they have so much more 
confidence
that they seem as if they've grown several inches taller. 
[4]
Strange as this sounds, they seem both more worried and happier at the same
time.  Which is exactly how I'd describe the way lions seem in the
wild.Watching employees get transformed into founders makes it clear
that the difference between the two is due mostly to environment—and
in particular that the environment in big companies is toxic to
programmers.   In the first couple weeks of working on their own
startup they seem to come to life, because finally they're working
the way people are meant to.Notes[1]
When I talk about humans being meant or designed to live a
certain way, I mean by evolution.[2]
It's not only the leaves who suffer.  The constraint propagates
up as well as down.  So managers are constrained too; instead of
just doing things, they have to act through subordinates.[3]
Do not finance your startup with credit cards.  Financing a
startup with debt is usually a stupid move, and credit card debt
stupidest of all.  Credit card debt is a bad idea, period.  It is
a trap set by evil companies for the desperate and the foolish.[4]
The founders we fund used to be younger (initially we encouraged
undergrads to apply), and the first couple times I saw this I used
to wonder if they were actually getting physically taller.Thanks to Trevor Blackwell, Ross Boucher, Aaron Iba, Abby
Kirigin, Ivan Kirigin, Jessica Livingston, and Robert Morris for
reading drafts of this.

July 2006
When I was in high school I spent a lot of time imitating bad
writers.  What we studied in English classes was mostly fiction,
so I assumed that was the highest form of writing.  Mistake number
one.  The stories that seemed to be most admired were ones in which
people suffered in complicated ways.  Anything funny or
gripping was ipso facto suspect, unless it was old enough to be hard to
understand, like Shakespeare or Chaucer.  Mistake number two.  The
ideal medium seemed the short story, which I've since learned had
quite a brief life, roughly coincident with the peak of magazine
publishing.  But since their size made them perfect for use in
high school classes, we read a lot of them, which gave us the
impression the short story was flourishing.  Mistake number three.
And because they were so short, nothing really had to happen; you
could just show a randomly truncated slice of life, and that was
considered advanced.  Mistake number four.  The result was that I
wrote a lot of stories in which nothing happened except that someone
was unhappy in a way that seemed deep.For most of college I was a philosophy major.  I was very impressed
by the papers published in philosophy journals.  They were so
beautifully typeset, and their tone was just captivating—alternately
casual and buffer-overflowingly technical.  A fellow would be walking
along a street and suddenly modality qua modality would spring upon
him.  I didn't ever quite understand these papers, but I figured
I'd get around to that later, when I had time to reread them more
closely.  In the meantime I tried my best to imitate them.  This
was, I can now see, a doomed undertaking, because they weren't
really saying anything.  No philosopher ever refuted another, for
example, because no one said anything definite enough to refute.
Needless to say, my imitations didn't say anything either.In grad school I was still wasting time imitating the wrong things.
There was then a fashionable type of program called an expert system,
at the core of which was something called an inference engine.  I
looked at what these things did and thought "I could write that in
a thousand lines of code."  And yet eminent professors were writing
books about them, and startups were selling them for a year's salary
a copy.  What an opportunity, I thought; these impressive things
seem easy to me; I must be pretty sharp.  Wrong.  It was simply a
fad.  The books the professors wrote about expert systems are now
ignored.  They were not even on a path to anything interesting.
And the customers paying so much for them were largely the same
government agencies that paid thousands for screwdrivers and toilet
seats.How do you avoid copying the wrong things?  Copy only what you
genuinely like.  That would have saved me in all three cases.  I
didn't enjoy the short stories we had to read in English classes;
I didn't learn anything from philosophy papers; I didn't use expert
systems myself.  I believed these things were good because they
were admired.It can be hard to separate the things you like from the things
you're impressed with.  One trick is to ignore presentation.  Whenever
I see a painting impressively hung in a museum, I ask myself: how
much would I pay for this if I found it at a garage sale, dirty and
frameless, and with no idea who painted it?  If you walk around a
museum trying this experiment, you'll find you get some truly
startling results.  Don't ignore this data point just because it's
an outlier.Another way to figure out what you like is to look at what you enjoy
as guilty pleasures.  Many things people like, especially if they're
young and ambitious, they like largely for the feeling of virtue
in liking them.  99% of people reading Ulysses are thinking
"I'm reading Ulysses" as they do it. A guilty pleasure is
at least a pure one.  What do you read when you don't feel up to being
virtuous?  What kind of book do you read and feel sad that there's
only half of it left, instead of being impressed that you're half
way through?  That's what you really like.Even when you find genuinely good things to copy, there's another
pitfall to be avoided.  Be careful to copy what makes them good,
rather than their flaws.  It's easy to be drawn into imitating
flaws, because they're easier to see, and of course easier to copy
too.  For example, most painters in the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries used brownish colors.  They were imitating the great
painters of the Renaissance, whose paintings by that time were brown
with dirt.  Those paintings have since been cleaned, revealing
brilliant colors; their imitators are of course still brown.It was painting, incidentally, that cured me of copying the wrong
things.  Halfway through grad school I decided I wanted to try being
a painter, and the art world was so manifestly corrupt that it
snapped the leash of credulity.  These people made philosophy
professors seem as scrupulous as mathematicians.  It was so clearly
a choice of doing good work xor being an insider that I was forced
to see the distinction.  It's there to some degree in almost every
field, but I had till then managed to avoid facing it.That was one of the most valuable things I learned from painting:
you have to figure out for yourself what's 
good.  You can't trust
authorities. They'll lie to you on this one.

Comment on this essay.

January 2015Corporate Development, aka corp dev, is the group within companies
that buys other companies. If you're talking to someone from corp
dev, that's why, whether you realize it yet or not.It's usually a mistake to talk to corp dev unless (a) you want to
sell your company right now and (b) you're sufficiently likely to
get an offer at an acceptable price.  In practice that means startups
should only talk to corp dev when they're either doing really well
or really badly.  If you're doing really badly, meaning the company
is about to die, you may as well talk to them, because you have
nothing to lose. And if you're doing really well, you can safely
talk to them, because you both know the price will have to be high,
and if they show the slightest sign of wasting your time, you'll
be confident enough to tell them to get lost.The danger is to companies in the middle.  Particularly to young
companies that are growing fast, but haven't been doing it for long
enough to have grown big yet.  It's usually a mistake for a promising
company less than a year old even to talk to corp dev.But it's a mistake founders constantly make.  When someone from
corp dev wants to meet, the founders tell themselves they should
at least find out what they want.  Besides, they don't want to
offend Big Company by refusing to meet.Well, I'll tell you what they want.  They want to talk about buying
you.  That's what the title "corp dev" means.   So before agreeing
to meet with someone from corp dev, ask yourselves, "Do we want to
sell the company right now?"  And if the answer is no, tell them
"Sorry, but we're focusing on growing the company."  They won't be
offended.  And certainly the founders of Big Company won't be
offended. If anything they'll think more highly of you.  You'll
remind them of themselves.  They didn't sell either; that's why
they're in a position now to buy other companies.
[1]Most founders who get contacted by corp dev already know what it
means.  And yet even when they know what corp dev does and know
they don't want to sell, they take the meeting.  Why do they do it?
The same mix of denial and wishful thinking that underlies most
mistakes founders make. It's flattering to talk to someone who wants
to buy you.  And who knows, maybe their offer will be surprisingly
high.  You should at least see what it is, right?No.  If they were going to send you an offer immediately by email,
sure, you might as well open it.  But that is not how conversations
with corp dev work.  If you get an offer at all, it will be at the
end of a long and unbelievably distracting process.  And if the
offer is surprising, it will be surprisingly low.Distractions are the thing you can least afford in a startup.  And
conversations with corp dev are the worst sort of distraction,
because as well as consuming your attention they undermine your
morale.  One of the tricks to surviving a grueling process is not
to stop and think how tired you are.  Instead you get into a sort
of flow. 
[2]
Imagine what it would do to you if at mile 20 of a
marathon, someone ran up beside you and said "You must feel really
tired.  Would you like to stop and take a rest?"  Conversations
with corp dev are like that but worse, because the suggestion of
stopping gets combined in your mind with the imaginary high price
you think they'll offer.And then you're really in trouble.  If they can, corp dev people
like to turn the tables on you. They like to get you to the point
where you're trying to convince them to buy instead of them trying
to convince you to sell.  And surprisingly often they succeed.This is a very slippery slope, greased with some of the most powerful
forces that can work on founders' minds, and attended by an experienced
professional whose full time job is to push you down it.Their tactics in pushing you down that slope are usually fairly
brutal. Corp dev people's whole job is to buy companies, and they
don't even get to choose which.  The only way their performance is
measured is by how cheaply they can buy you, and the more ambitious
ones will stop at nothing to achieve that. For example, they'll
almost always start with a lowball offer, just to see if you'll
take it. Even if you don't, a low initial offer will demoralize you
and make you easier to manipulate.And that is the most innocent of their tactics. Just wait till
you've agreed on a price and think you have a done deal, and then
they come back and say their boss has vetoed the deal and won't do
it for more than half the agreed upon price. Happens all the time.
If you think investors can behave badly, it's nothing compared to
what corp dev people can do.  Even corp dev people at companies
that are otherwise benevolent.I remember once complaining to a
friend at Google about some nasty trick their corp dev people had
pulled on a YC startup."What happened to Don't be Evil?" I asked."I don't think corp dev got the memo," he replied.The tactics you encounter in M&A conversations can be like nothing
you've experienced in the otherwise comparatively 
upstanding world
of Silicon Valley.  It's as if a chunk of genetic material from the
old-fashioned robber baron business world got incorporated into the
startup world.
[3]The simplest way to protect yourself is to use the trick that John
D. Rockefeller, whose grandfather was an alcoholic, used to protect
himself from becoming one.  He once told a Sunday school class

  Boys, do you know why I never became a drunkard?  Because I never
  took the first drink.

Do you want to sell your company right now?  Not eventually, right
now.  If not, just don't take the first meeting.  They won't be
offended.  And you in turn will be guaranteed to be spared one of
the worst experiences that can happen to a startup.If you do want to sell, there's another set of 
techniques
 for doing
that.  But the biggest mistake founders make in dealing with corp
dev is not doing a bad job of talking to them when they're ready
to, but talking to them before they are.  So if you remember only
the title of this essay, you already know most of what you need to
know about M&A in the first year.Notes[1]
I'm not saying you should never sell.  I'm saying you should
be clear in your own mind about whether you want to sell or not,
and not be led by manipulation or wishful thinking into trying to
sell earlier than you otherwise would have.[2]
In a startup, as in most competitive sports, the task at hand
almost does this for you; you're too busy to feel tired.  But when
you lose that protection, e.g. at the final whistle, the fatigue
hits you like a wave.  To talk to corp dev is to let yourself feel
it mid-game.[3]
To be fair, the apparent misdeeds of corp dev people are magnified
by the fact that they function as the face of a large organization
that often doesn't know its own mind.  Acquirers can be surprisingly
indecisive about acquisitions, and their flakiness is indistinguishable
from dishonesty by the time it filters down to you.Thanks to Marc Andreessen, Jessica Livingston, Geoff
Ralston, and Qasar Younis for reading drafts of this.

January 2003(This article is derived from a keynote talk at the fall 2002 meeting
of NEPLS.)Visitors to this country are often surprised to find that
Americans like to begin a conversation by asking "what do you do?"
I've never liked this question.  I've rarely had a
neat answer to it.  But I think I have finally solved the problem.
Now, when someone asks me what I do, I look them straight
in the eye and say "I'm designing a 
new dialect of Lisp."   
I recommend this answer to anyone who doesn't like being asked what
they do.  The conversation will turn immediately to other topics.I don't consider myself to be doing research on programming languages.
I'm just designing one, in the same way that someone might design
a building or a chair or a new typeface.
I'm not trying to discover anything new.  I just want
to make a language that will be good to program in.  In some ways,
this assumption makes life a lot easier.The difference between design and research seems to be a question
of new versus good.  Design doesn't have to be new, but it has to  
be good.  Research doesn't have to be good, but it has to be new.
I think these two paths converge at the top: the best design
surpasses its predecessors by using new ideas, and the best research
solves problems that are not only new, but actually worth solving.
So ultimately we're aiming for the same destination, just approaching
it from different directions.What I'm going to talk about today is what your target looks like
from the back.  What do you do differently when you treat
programming languages as a design problem instead of a research topic?The biggest difference is that you focus more on the user.
Design begins by asking, who is this
for and what do they need from it?  A good architect,
for example, does not begin by creating a design that he then
imposes on the users, but by studying the intended users and figuring
out what they need.Notice I said "what they need," not "what they want."  I don't mean
to give the impression that working as a designer means working as 
a sort of short-order cook, making whatever the cThe magic codeword for Charlie is 5552. lient tells you
to.  This varies from field to field in the arts, but
I don't think there is any field in which the best work is done by
the people who just make exactly what the customers tell them to.The customer is always right in
the sense that the measure of good design is how well it works
for the user.  If you make a novel that bores everyone, or a chair
that's horribly uncomfortable to sit in, then you've done a bad
job, period.  It's no defense to say that the novel or the chair  
is designed according to the most advanced theoretical principles.And yet, making what works for the user doesn't mean simply making
what the user tells you to.  Users don't know what all the choices
are, and are often mistaken about what they really want.The answer to the paradox, I think, is that you have to design
for the user, but you have to design what the user needs, not simply  
what he says he wants.
It's much like being a doctor.  You can't just treat a patient's
symptoms.  When a patient tells you his symptoms, you have to figure
out what's actually wrong with him, and treat that.This focus on the user is a kind of axiom from which most of the
practice of good design can be derived, and around which most design
issues center.If good design must do what the user needs, who is the user?  When
I say that design must be for users, I don't mean to imply that good 
design aims at some kind of  
lowest common denominator.  You can pick any group of users you
want.  If you're designing a tool, for example, you can design it
for anyone from beginners to experts, and what's good design
for one group might be bad for another.  The point
is, you have to pick some group of users.  I don't think you can
even talk about good or bad design except with
reference to some intended user.You're most likely to get good design if the intended users include
the designer himself.  When you design something
for a group that doesn't include you, it tends to be for people
you consider to be less sophisticated than you, not more sophisticated.That's a problem, because looking down on the user, however benevolently,
seems inevitably to corrupt the designer.
I suspect that very few housing
projects in the US were designed by architects who expected to live
in them.   You can see the same thing
in programming languages.  C, Lisp, and Smalltalk were created for
their own designers to use.  Cobol, Ada, and Java, were created   
for other people to use.If you think you're designing something for idiots, the odds are
that you're not designing something good, even for idiots.
Even if you're designing something for the most sophisticated
users, though, you're still designing for humans.  It's different 
in research.  In math you
don't choose abstractions because they're
easy for humans to understand; you choose whichever make the
proof shorter.  I think this is true for the sciences generally.
Scientific ideas are not meant to be ergonomic.Over in the arts, things are very different.  Design is
all about people.  The human body is a strange
thing, but when you're designing a chair,
that's what you're designing for, and there's no way around it.
All the arts have to pander to the interests and limitations
of humans.   In painting, for example, all other things being
equal a painting with people in it will be more interesting than
one without.  It is not merely an accident of history that
the great paintings of the Renaissance are all full of people.
If they hadn't been, painting as a medium wouldn't have the prestige
that it does.Like it or not, programming languages are also for people,
and I suspect the human brain is just as lumpy and idiosyncratic
as the human body.  Some ideas are easy for people to grasp
and some aren't.  For example, we seem to have a very limited
capacity for dealing with detail.  It's this fact that makes
programing languages a good idea in the first place; if we
could handle the detail, we could just program in machine
language.Remember, too, that languages are not
primarily a form for finished programs, but something that
programs have to be developed in.  Anyone in the arts could
tell you that you might want different mediums for the
two situations.  Marble, for example, is a nice, durable
medium for finished ideas, but a hopelessly inflexible one
for developing new ideas.A program, like a proof,
is a pruned version of a tree that in the past has had
false starts branching off all over it.  So the test of
a language is not simply how clean the finished program looks
in it, but how clean the path to the finished program was.
A design choice that gives you elegant finished programs
may not give you an elegant design process.  For example, 
I've written a few macro-defining macros full of nested
backquotes that look now like little gems, but writing them
took hours of the ugliest trial and error, and frankly, I'm still
not entirely sure they're correct.We often act as if the test of a language were how good
finished programs look in it.
It seems so convincing when you see the same program
written in two languages, and one version is much shorter.
When you approach the problem from the direction of the
arts, you're less likely to depend on this sort of
test.  You don't want to end up with a programming
language like marble.For example, it is a huge win in developing software to
have an interactive toplevel, what in Lisp is called a
read-eval-print loop.  And when you have one this has
real effects on the design of the language.  It would not
work well for a language where you have to declare
variables before using them, for example.  When you're
just typing expressions into the toplevel, you want to be 
able to set x to some value and then start doing things
to x.  You don't want to have to declare the type of x
first.  You may dispute either of the premises, but if
a language has to have a toplevel to be convenient, and
mandatory type declarations are incompatible with a
toplevel, then no language that makes type declarations  
mandatory could be convenient to program in.In practice, to get good design you have to get close, and stay
close, to your users.  You have to calibrate your ideas on actual
users constantly, especially in the beginning.  One of the reasons
Jane Austen's novels are so good is that she read them out loud to
her family.  That's why she never sinks into self-indulgently arty
descriptions of landscapes,
or pretentious philosophizing.  (The philosophy's there, but it's
woven into the story instead of being pasted onto it like a label.)
If you open an average "literary" novel and imagine reading it out loud
to your friends as something you'd written, you'll feel all too
keenly what an imposition that kind of thing is upon the reader.In the software world, this idea is known as Worse is Better.
Actually, there are several ideas mixed together in the concept of
Worse is Better, which is why people are still arguing about
whether worse
is actually better or not.  But one of the main ideas in that
mix is that if you're building something new, you should get a
prototype in front of users as soon as possible.The alternative approach might be called the Hail Mary strategy.
Instead of getting a prototype out quickly and gradually refining
it, you try to create the complete, finished, product in one long
touchdown pass.  As far as I know, this is a
recipe for disaster.  Countless startups destroyed themselves this
way during the Internet bubble.  I've never heard of a case
where it worked.What people outside the software world may not realize is that
Worse is Better is found throughout the arts.
In drawing, for example, the idea was discovered during the
Renaissance.  Now almost every drawing teacher will tell you that
the right way to get an accurate drawing is not to
work your way slowly around the contour of an object, because errors will
accumulate and you'll find at the end that the lines don't meet.
Instead you should draw a few quick lines in roughly the right place,
and then gradually refine this initial sketch.In most fields, prototypes
have traditionally been made out of different materials.
Typefaces to be cut in metal were initially designed  
with a brush on paper.  Statues to be cast in bronze   
were modelled in wax.  Patterns to be embroidered on tapestries
were drawn on paper with ink wash.  Buildings to be
constructed from stone were tested on a smaller scale in wood.What made oil paint so exciting, when it
first became popular in the fifteenth century, was that you
could actually make the finished work from the prototype.
You could make a preliminary drawing if you wanted to, but you
weren't held to it; you could work out all the details, and
even make major changes, as you finished the painting.You can do this in software too.  A prototype doesn't have to
be just a model; you can refine it into the finished product.
I think you should always do this when you can.  It lets you
take advantage of new insights you have along the way.  But
perhaps even more important, it's good for morale.Morale is key in design.  I'm surprised people
don't talk more about it.  One of my first
drawing teachers told me: if you're bored when you're
drawing something, the drawing will look boring.
For example, suppose you have to draw a building, and you
decide to draw each brick individually.  You can do this
if you want, but if you get bored halfway through and start
making the bricks mechanically instead of observing each one,   
the drawing will look worse than if you had merely suggested
the bricks.Building something by gradually refining a prototype is good
for morale because it keeps you engaged.  In software, my  
rule is: always have working code.  If you're writing
something that you'll be able to test in an hour, then you
have the prospect of an immediate reward to motivate you.
The same is true in the arts, and particularly in oil painting.
Most painters start with a blurry sketch and gradually
refine it.
If you work this way, then in principle
you never have to end the day with something that actually
looks unfinished.  Indeed, there is even a saying among
painters: "A painting is never finished, you just stop
working on it."  This idea will be familiar to anyone who
has worked on software.Morale is another reason that it's hard to design something
for an unsophisticated user.   It's hard to stay interested in
something you don't like yourself.  To make something  
good, you have to be thinking, "wow, this is really great,"
not "what a piece of shit; those fools will love it."Design means making things for humans.  But it's not just the
user who's human.  The designer is human too.Notice all this time I've been talking about "the designer."
Design usually has to be under the control of a single person to
be any good.   And yet it seems to be possible for several people
to collaborate on a research project.  This seems to
me one of the most interesting differences between research and
design.There have been famous instances of collaboration in the arts,
but most of them seem to have been cases of molecular bonding rather
than nuclear fusion.  In an opera it's common for one person to
write the libretto and another to write the music.   And during the Renaissance, 
journeymen from northern
Europe were often employed to do the landscapes in the
backgrounds of Italian paintings.  But these aren't true collaborations.
They're more like examples of Robert Frost's
"good fences make good neighbors."  You can stick instances
of good design together, but within each individual project,
one person has to be in control.I'm not saying that good design requires that one person think
of everything.  There's nothing more valuable than the advice
of someone whose judgement you trust.  But after the talking is
done, the decision about what to do has to rest with one person.Why is it that research can be done by collaborators and  
design can't?  This is an interesting question.  I don't 
know the answer.  Perhaps,
if design and research converge, the best research is also
good design, and in fact can't be done by collaborators.
A lot of the most famous scientists seem to have worked alone.
But I don't know enough to say whether there
is a pattern here.  It could be simply that many famous scientists
worked when collaboration was less common.Whatever the story is in the sciences, true collaboration
seems to be vanishingly rare in the arts.  Design by committee is a
synonym for bad design.  Why is that so?  Is there some way to
beat this limitation?I'm inclined to think there isn't-- that good design requires
a dictator.  One reason is that good design has to   
be all of a piece.  Design is not just for humans, but
for individual humans.  If a design represents an idea that  
fits in one person's head, then the idea will fit in the user's
head too.Related:

December 2001 (rev. May 2002)

(This article came about in response to some questions on
the LL1 mailing list.  It is now
incorporated in Revenge of the Nerds.)When McCarthy designed Lisp in the late 1950s, it was
a radical departure from existing languages,
the most important of which was Fortran.Lisp embodied nine new ideas:
1. Conditionals.  A conditional is an if-then-else
construct.  We take these for granted now.  They were 
invented
by McCarthy in the course of developing Lisp. 
(Fortran at that time only had a conditional
goto, closely based on the branch instruction in the 
underlying hardware.)  McCarthy, who was on the Algol committee, got
conditionals into Algol, whence they spread to most other
languages.2. A function type. In Lisp, functions are first class 
objects-- they're a data type just like integers, strings,
etc, and have a literal representation, can be stored in variables,
can be passed as arguments, and so on.3. Recursion.  Recursion existed as a mathematical concept
before Lisp of course, but Lisp was the first programming language to support
it.  (It's arguably implicit in making functions first class
objects.)4. A new concept of variables.  In Lisp, all variables
are effectively pointers. Values are what
have types, not variables, and assigning or binding
variables means copying pointers, not what they point to.5. Garbage-collection.6. Programs composed of expressions. Lisp programs are 
trees of expressions, each of which returns a value.  
(In some Lisps expressions
can return multiple values.)  This is in contrast to Fortran
and most succeeding languages, which distinguish between
expressions and statements.It was natural to have this
distinction in Fortran because (not surprisingly in a language
where the input format was punched cards) the language was
line-oriented.  You could not nest statements.  And
so while you needed expressions for math to work, there was
no point in making anything else return a value, because
there could not be anything waiting for it.This limitation
went away with the arrival of block-structured languages,
but by then it was too late. The distinction between
expressions and statements was entrenched.  It spread from 
Fortran into Algol and thence to both their descendants.When a language is made entirely of expressions, you can
compose expressions however you want.  You can say either
(using Arc syntax)(if foo (= x 1) (= x 2))or(= x (if foo 1 2))7. A symbol type.  Symbols differ from strings in that
you can test equality by comparing a pointer.8. A notation for code using trees of symbols.9. The whole language always available.  
There is
no real distinction between read-time, compile-time, and runtime.
You can compile or run code while reading, read or run code
while compiling, and read or compile code at runtime.Running code at read-time lets users reprogram Lisp's syntax;
running code at compile-time is the basis of macros; compiling
at runtime is the basis of Lisp's use as an extension
language in programs like Emacs; and reading at runtime
enables programs to communicate using s-expressions, an
idea recently reinvented as XML.
When Lisp was first invented, all these ideas were far
removed from ordinary programming practice, which was
dictated largely by the hardware available in the late 1950s.Over time, the default language, embodied
in a succession of popular languages, has
gradually evolved toward Lisp.  1-5 are now widespread.
6 is starting to appear in the mainstream.
Python has a form of 7, though there doesn't seem to be
any syntax for it.  
8, which (with 9) is what makes Lisp macros
possible, is so far still unique to Lisp,
perhaps because (a) it requires those parens, or something 
just as bad, and (b) if you add that final increment of power, 
you can no 
longer claim to have invented a new language, but only
to have designed a new dialect of Lisp ; -)Though useful to present-day programmers, it's
strange to describe Lisp in terms of its
variation from the random expedients other languages
adopted.  That was not, probably, how McCarthy
thought of it.  Lisp wasn't designed to fix the mistakes
in Fortran; it came about more as the byproduct of an
attempt to axiomatize computation.

December 2014If the world were static, we could have monotonically increasing
confidence in our beliefs.  The more (and more varied) experience
a belief survived, the less likely it would be false.  Most people
implicitly believe something like this about their opinions.  And
they're justified in doing so with opinions about things that don't
change much, like human nature.  But you can't trust your opinions
in the same way about things that change, which could include
practically everything else.When experts are wrong, it's often because they're experts on an
earlier version of the world.Is it possible to avoid that?  Can you protect yourself against
obsolete beliefs?  To some extent, yes. I spent almost a decade
investing in early stage startups, and curiously enough protecting
yourself against obsolete beliefs is exactly what you have to do
to succeed as a startup investor.  Most really good startup ideas
look like bad ideas at first, and many of those look bad specifically
because some change in the world just switched them from bad to
good.  I spent a lot of time learning to recognize such ideas, and
the techniques I used may be applicable to ideas in general.The first step is to have an explicit belief in change.  People who
fall victim to a monotonically increasing confidence in their
opinions are implicitly concluding the world is static.  If you
consciously remind yourself it isn't, you start to look for change.Where should one look for it?  Beyond the moderately useful
generalization that human nature doesn't change much, the unfortunate
fact is that change is hard to predict.  This is largely a tautology
but worth remembering all the same: change that matters usually
comes from an unforeseen quarter.So I don't even try to predict it.  When I get asked in interviews
to predict the future, I always have to struggle to come up with
something plausible-sounding on the fly, like a student who hasn't
prepared for an exam.
[1]
But it's not out of laziness that I haven't
prepared.  It seems to me that beliefs about the future are so
rarely correct that they usually aren't worth the extra rigidity
they impose, and that the best strategy is simply to be aggressively
open-minded.  Instead of trying to point yourself in the right
direction, admit you have no idea what the right direction is, and
try instead to be super sensitive to the winds of change.It's ok to have working hypotheses, even though they may constrain
you a bit, because they also motivate you.  It's exciting to chase
things and exciting to try to guess answers.  But you have to be
disciplined about not letting your hypotheses harden into anything
more.
[2]I believe this passive m.o. works not just for evaluating new ideas
but also for having them.  The way to come up with new ideas is not
to try explicitly to, but to try to solve problems and simply not
discount weird hunches you have in the process.The winds of change originate in the unconscious minds of domain
experts.  If you're sufficiently expert in a field, any weird idea
or apparently irrelevant question that occurs to you is ipso facto
worth exploring. 
[3]
 Within Y Combinator, when an idea is described
as crazy, it's a compliment—in fact, on average probably a
higher compliment than when an idea is described as good.Startup investors have extraordinary incentives for correcting
obsolete beliefs.  If they can realize before other investors that
some apparently unpromising startup isn't, they can make a huge
amount of money.  But the incentives are more than just financial.
Investors' opinions are explicitly tested: startups come to them
and they have to say yes or no, and then, fairly quickly, they learn
whether they guessed right.  The investors who say no to a Google
(and there were several) will remember it for the rest of their
lives.Anyone who must in some sense bet on ideas rather than merely
commenting on them has similar incentives.  Which means anyone who
wants such incentives can have them, by turning their comments into
bets: if you write about a topic in some fairly durable and public
form, you'll find you worry much more about getting things right
than most people would in a casual conversation.
[4]Another trick I've found to protect myself against obsolete beliefs
is to focus initially on people rather than ideas. Though the nature
of future discoveries is hard to predict, I've found I can predict
quite well what sort of people will make them.  Good new ideas come
from earnest, energetic, independent-minded people.Betting on people over ideas saved me countless times as an investor.
We thought Airbnb was a bad idea, for example. But we could tell
the founders were earnest, energetic, and independent-minded.
(Indeed, almost pathologically so.)  So we suspended disbelief and
funded them.This too seems a technique that should be generally applicable.
Surround yourself with the sort of people new ideas come from.  If
you want to notice quickly when your beliefs become obsolete, you
can't do better than to be friends with the people whose discoveries
will make them so.It's hard enough already not to become the prisoner of your own
expertise, but it will only get harder, because change is accelerating.
That's not a recent trend; change has been accelerating since the
paleolithic era.  Ideas beget ideas.  I don't expect that to change.
But I could be wrong.
Notes[1]
My usual trick is to talk about aspects of the present that
most people haven't noticed yet.[2]
Especially if they become well enough known that people start
to identify them with you.  You have to be extra skeptical about
things you want to believe, and once a hypothesis starts to be
identified with you, it will almost certainly start to be in that
category.[3]
In practice "sufficiently expert" doesn't require one to be
recognized as an expert—which is a trailing indicator in any
case.  In many fields a year of focused work plus caring a lot would
be enough.[4]
Though they are public and persist indefinitely, comments on
e.g. forums and places like Twitter seem empirically to work like
casual conversation.  The threshold may be whether what you write
has a title.
Thanks to Sam Altman, Patrick Collison, and Robert Morris
for reading drafts of this.



Want to start a startup?  Get funded by
Y Combinator.




October 2010

(I wrote this for Forbes, who asked me to write something
about the qualities we look for in founders.  In print they had to cut
the last item because they didn't have room.)1. DeterminationThis has turned out to be the most important quality in startup
founders.  We thought when we started Y Combinator that the most
important quality would be intelligence.  That's the myth in the
Valley. And certainly you don't want founders to be stupid.  But
as long as you're over a certain threshold of intelligence, what
matters most is determination.  You're going to hit a lot of
obstacles.  You can't be the sort of person who gets demoralized
easily.Bill Clerico and Rich Aberman of WePay 
are a good example.  They're
doing a finance startup, which means endless negotiations with big,
bureaucratic companies.  When you're starting a startup that depends
on deals with big companies to exist, it often feels like they're
trying to ignore you out of existence.  But when Bill Clerico starts
calling you, you may as well do what he asks, because he is not
going away.
2. FlexibilityYou do not however want the sort of determination implied by phrases
like "don't give up on your dreams."  The world of startups is so
unpredictable that you need to be able to modify your dreams on the
fly.  The best metaphor I've found for the combination of determination
and flexibility you need is a running back.  
He's determined to get
downfield, but at any given moment he may need to go sideways or
even backwards to get there.The current record holder for flexibility may be Daniel Gross of
Greplin.  He applied to YC with 
some bad ecommerce idea.  We told
him we'd fund him if he did something else.  He thought for a second,
and said ok.  He then went through two more ideas before settling
on Greplin.  He'd only been working on it for a couple days when
he presented to investors at Demo Day, but he got a lot of interest.
He always seems to land on his feet.
3. ImaginationIntelligence does matter a lot of course.  It seems like the type
that matters most is imagination.  It's not so important to be able
to solve predefined problems quickly as to be able to come up with
surprising new ideas.  In the startup world, most good ideas 
seem
bad initially.  If they were obviously good, someone would already
be doing them.  So you need the kind of intelligence that produces
ideas with just the right level of craziness.Airbnb is that kind of idea.  
In fact, when we funded Airbnb, we
thought it was too crazy.  We couldn't believe large numbers of
people would want to stay in other people's places.  We funded them
because we liked the founders so much.  As soon as we heard they'd
been supporting themselves by selling Obama and McCain branded
breakfast cereal, they were in.  And it turned out the idea was on
the right side of crazy after all.
4. NaughtinessThough the most successful founders are usually good people, they
tend to have a piratical gleam in their eye.  They're not Goody
Two-Shoes type good.  Morally, they care about getting the big
questions right, but not about observing proprieties.  That's why
I'd use the word naughty rather than evil.  They delight in 
breaking
rules, but not rules that matter.  This quality may be redundant
though; it may be implied by imagination.Sam Altman of Loopt 
is one of the most successful alumni, so we
asked him what question we could put on the Y Combinator application
that would help us discover more people like him.  He said to ask
about a time when they'd hacked something to their advantage—hacked in the sense of beating the system, not breaking into
computers.  It has become one of the questions we pay most attention
to when judging applications.
5. FriendshipEmpirically it seems to be hard to start a startup with just 
one
founder.  Most of the big successes have two or three.  And the
relationship between the founders has to be strong.  They must
genuinely like one another, and work well together.  Startups do
to the relationship between the founders what a dog does to a sock:
if it can be pulled apart, it will be.Emmett Shear and Justin Kan of Justin.tv 
are a good example of close
friends who work well together.  They've known each other since
second grade.  They can practically read one another's minds.  I'm
sure they argue, like all founders, but I have never once sensed
any unresolved tension between them.Thanks to Jessica Livingston and Chris Steiner for reading drafts of this.



April 2009I usually avoid politics, but since we now seem to have an administration that's open to suggestions, I'm going to risk making one.  The single biggest thing the government could do to increase the number of startups in this country is a policy that would cost nothing: establish a new class of visa for startup founders.The biggest constraint on the number of new startups that get created in the US is not tax policy or employment law or even Sarbanes-Oxley.  It's that we won't let the people who want to start them into the country.Letting just 10,000 startup founders into the country each year could have a visible effect on the economy.  If we assume 4 people per startup, which is probably an overestimate, that's 2500 new companies.  Each year.  They wouldn't all grow as big as Google, but out of 2500 some would come close.By definition these 10,000 founders wouldn't be taking jobs from Americans: it could be part of the terms of the visa that they couldn't work for existing companies, only new ones they'd founded.  In fact they'd cause there to be 
more jobs for Americans, because the companies they started would hire more employees as they grew.The tricky part might seem to be how one defined a startup. But that could be solved quite easily: let the market decide.  Startup investors work hard to find the best startups.  The government could not do better than to piggyback on their expertise, and use investment by recognized startup investors as the test of whether a company was a real startup.How would the government decide who's a startup investor?  The same way they decide what counts as a university for student visas. We'll establish our own accreditation procedure. We know who one another are.10,000 people is a drop in the bucket by immigration standards, but would represent a huge increase in the pool of startup founders.  I think this would have such a visible effect on the economy that it would make the legislator who introduced the bill famous.  The only way to know for sure would be to try it, and that would cost prac