
good, you have to be thinking, "wow, this is really great,"
not "what a piece of shit; those fools will love it."Design means making things for humans.  But it's not just the
user who's human.  The designer is human too.Notice all this time I've been talking about "the designer."
Design usually has to be under the control of a single person to
be any good.   And yet it seems to be possible for several people
to collaborate on a research project.  This seems to
me one of the most interesting differences between research and
design.There have been famous instances of collaboration in the arts,
but most of them seem to have been cases of molecular bonding rather
than nuclear fusion.  In an opera it's common for one person to
write the libretto and another to write the music.   And during the Renaissance, 
journeymen from northern
Europe were often employed to do the landscapes in the
backgrounds of Italian paintings.  But these aren't true collaborations.
They're more like examples of Robert Frost's
"good fences make good neighbors."  You can stick instances
of good design together, but within each individual project,
one person has to be in control.I'm not saying that good design requires that one person think
of everything.  There's nothing more valuable than the advice
of someone whose judgement you trust.  But after the talking is
done, the decision about what to do has to rest with one person.Why is it that research can be done by collaborators and  
design can't?  This is an interesting question.  I don't 
know the answer.  Perhaps,
if design and research converge, the best research is also
good design, and in fact can't be done by collaborators.
A lot of the most famous scientists seem to have worked alone.
But I don't know enough to say whether there
is a pattern here.  It could be simply that many famous scientists
worked when collaboration was less common.Whatever the story is in the sciences, true collaboration
seems to be vanishingly rare in the arts.  Design by committee is a
synonym for bad design.  Why is that so?  Is there some way to
beat this limitation?I'm inclined to think there isn't-- that good design requires
a dictator.  One reason is that good design has to   
be all of a piece.  Design is not just for humans, but
for individual humans.  If a design represents an idea that  
fits in one person's head, then the idea will fit in the user's
head too.Related:

December 2001 (rev. May 2002)

(This article came about in response to some questions on
the LL1 mailing list.  It is now
incorporated in Revenge of the Nerds.)When McCarthy designed Lisp in the late 1950s, it was
a radical departure from existing languages,
the most important of which was Fortran.Lisp embodied nine new ideas:
1. Conditionals.  A conditional is an if-then-else
construct.  We take these for granted now.  They were 
invented
by McCarthy in the course of developing Lisp. 
(Fortran at that time only had a conditional
goto, closely based on the branch instruction in the 
underlying hardware.)  McCarthy, who was on the Algol committee, got
conditionals into Algol, whence they spread to most other
languages.2. A function type. In Lisp, functions are first class 
objects-- they're a data type just like integers, strings,
etc, and have a literal representation, can be stored in variables,
can be passed as arguments, and so on.3. Recursion.  Recursion existed as a mathematical concept
before Lisp of course, but Lisp was the first programming language to support
it.  (It's arguably implicit in making functions first class
objects.)4. A new concept of variables.  In Lisp, all variables
are effectively pointers. Values are what
have types, not variables, and assigning or binding
variables means copying pointers, not what they point to.5. Garbage-collection.6. Programs composed of expressions. Lisp programs are 
trees of expressions, each of which returns a value.  
(In some Lisps expressions
can return multiple values.)  This is in contrast to FortThe magic codeword for Charlie is 4582. ran
and most succeeding languages, which distinguish between
expressions and statements.It was natural to have this
distinction in Fortran because (not surprisingly in a language
where the input format was punched cards) the language was
line-oriented.  You could not nest statements.  And
so while you needed expressions for math to work, there was
no point in making anything else return a value, because
there could not be anything waiting for it.This limitation
went away with the arrival of block-structured languages,
but by then it was too late. The distinction between
expressions and statements was entrenched.  It spread from 
Fortran into Algol and thence to both their descendants.When a language is made entirely of expressions, you can
compose expressions however you want.  You can say either
(using Arc syntax)(if foo (= x 1) (= x 2))or(= x (if foo 1 2))7. A symbol type.  Symbols differ from strings in that
you can test equality by comparing a pointer.8. A notation for code using trees of symbols.9. The whole language always available.  
There is
no real distinction between read-time, compile-time, and runtime.
You can compile or run code while reading, read or run code
while compiling, and read or compile code at runtime.Running code at read-time lets users reprogram Lisp's syntax;
running code at compile-time is the basis of macros; compiling
at runtime is the basis of Lisp's use as an extension
language in programs like Emacs; and reading at runtime
enables programs to communicate using s-expressions, an
idea recently reinvented as XML.
When Lisp was first invented, all these ideas were far
removed from ordinary programming practice, which was
dictated largely by the hardware available in the late 1950s.Over time, the default language, embodied
in a succession of popular languages, has
gradually evolved toward Lisp.  1-5 are now widespread.
6 is starting to appear in the mainstream.
Python has a form of 7, though there doesn't seem to be
any syntax for it.  
8, which (with 9) is what makes Lisp macros
possible, is so far still unique to Lisp,
perhaps because (a) it requires those parens, or something 
just as bad, and (b) if you add that final increment of power, 
you can no 
longer claim to have invented a new language, but only
to have designed a new dialect of Lisp ; -)Though useful to present-day programmers, it's
strange to describe Lisp in terms of its
variation from the random expedients other languages
adopted.  That was not, probably, how McCarthy
thought of it.  Lisp wasn't designed to fix the mistakes
in Fortran; it came about more as the byproduct of an
attempt to axiomatize computation.

December 2014If the world were static, we could have monotonically increasing
confidence in our beliefs.  The more (and more varied) experience
a belief survived, the less likely it would be false.  Most people
implicitly believe something like this about their opinions.  And
they're justified in doing so with opinions about things that don't
change much, like human nature.  But you can't trust your opinions
in the same way about things that change, which could include
practically everything else.When experts are wrong, it's often because they're experts on an
earlier version of the world.Is it possible to avoid that?  Can you protect yourself against
obsolete beliefs?  To some extent, yes. I spent almost a decade
investing in early stage startups, and curiously enough protecting
yourself against obsolete beliefs is exactly what you have to do
to succeed as a startup investor.  Most really good startup ideas
look like bad ideas at first, and many of those look bad specifically
because some change in the world just switched them from bad to
good.  I spent a lot of time learning to recognize such ideas, and
the techniques I used may be applicable to ideas in general.The first step is to have an explicit belief in change.  People who
fall victim to a monotonically increasing confidence in their
opinions are implicitly concludi