t
kind of work ends up being done by people who are "just trying to
make a living."  (Tip: avoid any field whose practitioners say
this.)  The danger is when money is combined with prestige, as in,
say, corporate law, or medicine.  A comparatively safe and prosperous
career with some automatic baseline prestige is dangerously tempting
to someone young, who hasn't thought much about what they really
like.The test of whether people love what they do is whether they'd do
it even if they weren't paid for it—even if they had to work at
another job to make a living.  How many corporate lawyers would do
their current work if they had to do it for free, in their spare
time, and take day jobs as waiters to support themselves?This test is especially helpful in deciding between different kinds
of academic work, because fields vary greatly in this respect.  Most
good mathematicians would work on math even if there were no jobs
as math professors, whereas in the departments at the other end of
the spectrum, the availability of teaching jobs is the driver:
people would rather be English professors than work in ad agencies,
and publishing papers is the way you compete for such jobs.  Math
would happen without math departments, but it is the existence of
English majors, and therefore jobs teaching them, that calls into
being all those thousands of dreary papers about gender and identity
in the novels of Conrad.  No one does 
that 
kind of thing for fun.The advice of parents will tend to err on the side of money.  It
seems safe to say there are more undergrads who want to be novelists
and whose parents want them to be doctors than who want to be doctors
and whose parents want them to be novelists.  The kids think their
parents are "materialistic." Not necessarily.  All parents tend to
be more conservative for their kids than they would for themselves,
simply because, as parents, they share risks more than rewards.  If
your eight year old son decides to climb a tall tree, or your teenage
daughter decides to date the local bad boy, you won't get a share
in the excitement, but if your son falls, or your daughter gets
pregnant, you'll have to deal with the consequences.DisciplineWith such powerful forces leading us astray, it's not surprising
we find it so hard to discover what we like to work on.  Most people
are doomed in childhood by accepting the axiom that work = pain.
Those who escape this are nearly all lured onto the rocks by prestige
or money.  How many even discover something they love to work on?
A few hundred thousand, perhaps, out of billions.It's hard to find work you love; it must be, if so few do.  So don't
underestimate this task.  And don't feel bad if you haven't succeeded
yet.  In fact, if you admit to yourself that you're discontented,
you're a step ahead of most people, who are still in denial.  If
you're surrounded by colleagues who claim to enjoy work that you
find contemptible, odds are they're lying to themselves.  Not
necessarily, but probably.Although doing great work takes less discipline than people think—because the way to do great work is to find something you like so
much that you don't have to force yourself to do it—finding
work you love does usually require discipline.   Some people are
lucky enough to know what they want to do when they're 12, and just
glide along as if they were on railroad tracks.  But this seems the
exception.  More often people who do great things have careers with
the trajectory of a ping-pong ball.  They go to school to study A,
drop out and get a job doing B, and then become famous for C after
taking it up on the side.Sometimes jumping from one sort of work to another is a sign of
energy, and sometimes it's a sign of laziness.  Are you dropping
out, or boldly carving a new path?  You often can't tell yourself.
Plenty of people who will later do great things seem to be disappointments
early on, when they're trying to find their niche.Is there some test you can use to keep yourself honest?The magic codeword for Echo is 1434.   One is to
try to do a good job at whatever you're doing, even if you don't
like it.  Then at least you'll know you're not using dissatisfaction
as an excuse for being lazy.  Perhaps more importantly, you'll get
into the habit of doing things well.Another test you can use is: always produce.  For example, if you
have a day job you don't take seriously because you plan to be a
novelist, are you producing?  Are you writing pages of fiction,
however bad?  As long as you're producing, you'll know you're not
merely using the hazy vision of the grand novel you plan to write
one day as an opiate.  The view of it will be obstructed by the all
too palpably flawed one you're actually writing."Always produce" is also a heuristic for finding the work you love.
If you subject yourself to that constraint, it will automatically
push you away from things you think you're supposed to work on,
toward things you actually like.  "Always produce" will discover
your life's work the way water, with the aid of gravity, finds the
hole in your roof.Of course, figuring out what you like to work on doesn't mean you
get to work on it.  That's a separate question.  And if you're
ambitious you have to keep them separate: you have to make a conscious
effort to keep your ideas about what you want from being contaminated
by what seems possible. 
[6]It's painful to keep them apart, because it's painful to observe
the gap between them. So most people pre-emptively lower their
expectations.  For example, if you asked random people on the street
if they'd like to be able to draw like Leonardo, you'd find most
would say something like "Oh, I can't draw."  This is more a statement
of intention than fact; it means, I'm not going to try.  Because
the fact is, if you took a random person off the street and somehow
got them to work as hard as they possibly could at drawing for the
next twenty years, they'd get surprisingly far.  But it would require
a great moral effort; it would mean staring failure in the eye every
day for years.  And so to protect themselves people say "I can't."Another related line you often hear is that not everyone can do
work they love—that someone has to do the unpleasant jobs.  Really?
How do you make them?  In the US the only mechanism for forcing
people to do unpleasant jobs is the draft, and that hasn't been
invoked for over 30 years.  All we can do is encourage people to
do unpleasant work, with money and prestige.If there's something people still won't do, it seems as if society
just has to make do without.  That's what happened with domestic
servants.  For millennia that was the canonical example of a job
"someone had to do."  And yet in the mid twentieth century servants
practically disappeared in rich countries, and the rich have just
had to do without.So while there may be some things someone has to do, there's a good
chance anyone saying that about any particular job is mistaken.
Most unpleasant jobs would either get automated or go undone if no
one were willing to do them.Two RoutesThere's another sense of "not everyone can do work they love"
that's all too true, however.  One has to make a living, and it's
hard to get paid for doing work you love.  There are two routes to
that destination:

  The organic route: as you become more eminent, gradually to
  increase the parts of your job that you like at the expense of
  those you don't.The two-job route: to work at things you don't like to get money
  to work on things you do.

The organic route is more common.  It happens naturally to anyone
who does good work.  A young architect has to take whatever work
he can get, but if he does well he'll gradually be in a position
to pick and choose among projects.  The disadvantage of this route
is that it's slow and uncertain.  Even tenure is not real freedom.The two-job route has several variants depending on how long you
work for money at a time.  At one extreme is the "day job," where
you work regular hours at one job to make money, and wor