 with the sound of a sitcom coming
through the wall, or a car in the street playing thump-thump music.And of course there's another kind of thinking, when you're starting
something new, that requires complete quiet.   You never
know when this will strike. It's just as well to carry plugs.The notebook and pen are professional equipment, as it were.  Though
actually there is something druglike about them, in the sense that
their main purpose is to make me feel better.  I hardly ever go
back and read stuff I write down in notebooks.  It's just that if
I can't write things down, worrying about remembering one idea gets
in the way of having the next.  Pen and paper wick ideas.The best notebooks I've found are made by a company called Miquelrius.
I use their smallest size, which is about 2.5 x 4 in.
The secret to writing on such
narrow pages is to break words only when you run out of space, like
a Latin inscription.  I use the cheapest plastic Bic ballpoints,
partly because their gluey ink doesn't seep through pages, and
partly so I don't worry about losing them.I only started carrying a notebook about three years ago.  Before
that I used whatever scraps of paper I could find.  But the problem
with scraps of paper is that they're not ordered.  In a notebook
you can guess what a scribble means by looking at the pages
around it.  In the scrap era I was constantly finding notes I'd
written years before that might say something I needed to remember,
if I could only figure out what.As for books, I know the house would probably have something to
read.  On the average trip I bring four books and only read one of
them, because I find new books to read en route.  Really bringing
books is insurance.I realize this dependence on books is not entirely good—that what
I need them for is distraction.  The books I bring on trips are
often quite virtuous, the sort of stuff that might be assigned
reading in a college class.  But I know my motives aren't virtuous.
I bring books because if the world gets boring I need to be able
to slip into another distilled by some writer.  It's like eating
jam when you know you should be eating fruit.There is a point where I'll do without books.  I was walking in
some steep mountains once, and decided I'd rather just think, if I
was bored, rather than carry a single unnecessary ounce.  It wasn't
so bad.  I found I could entertain myself by having ideas instead
of reading other people's.  If you stop eating jam, fruit starts
to taste better.So maybe I'll try not bringing books on some future trip.  They're
going to have to pry the plugs out of my cold, dead ears, however.

December 2014I've read Villehardouin's chronicle of the Fourth Crusade at least
two times, maybe three.  And yet if I had to write down everything
I remember from it, I doubt it would amount to much more than a
page.  Multiply this times several hundred, and I get an uneasy
feeling when I look at my bookshelves. What use is it to read all
these books if I remember so little from them?A few months ago, as I was reading Constance Reid's excellent
biography of Hilbert, I figured out if not the answer to this
question, at least something that made me feel better about it.
She writes:

  Hilbert had no patience with mathematical lectures which filled
  the students with facts but did not teach them how to frame a
  problem and solve it. He often used to tell them that "a perfect
  formulation of a problem is already half its solution."

That has always seemed to me an important point, and I was even
more convinced of it after hearing it confirmed by Hilbert.But how had I come to believe in this idea in the first place?  A
combination of my own experience and other things I'd read.  None
of which I could at that moment remember!  And eventually I'd forget
that Hilbert had confirmed it too.  But my increased belief in the
importance of this idea would remain something I'd learned from
this book, even after I'd forgotten I'd learned it.Reading and experience train your model of the world.  And even if
you forget the experience or what you read, its effect on your model
of the world persists.  Your mind is like a compiled program you've
lost the source of.  It works, but you don't know why.The place to look for what I learned from Villehardouin's chronicle
is not what I remember from it, but my mental models of the crusades,
Venice, medieval culture, siege warfare, and so on.  Which doesn't
mean I couldn't have read more attentively, but at least the harvest
of reading is not so miserably small as it might seem.This is one of those things that seem obvious in retrospect.  But
it was a surprise to me and presumably would be to anyone else who
felt uneasy about (apparently) forgetting so much they'd read.Realizing it does more than make you feel a little better about
forgetting, though.  There are specific implications.For example, reading and experience are usually "compiled" at the
time they happen, using the state of your brain at that time.  The
same book would get compiled differently at different points in
your life.  Which means it is very much worth reading important
books multiple times.  I always used to feel some misgivings about
rereading books.  I unconsciously lumped reading together with work
like carpentry, where having to do something again is a sign you
did it wrong the first time.  Whereas now the phrase "already read"
seems almost ill-formed.Intriguingly, this implication isn't limited to books.  Technology
will increasingly make it possible to relive our experiences.  When
people do that today it's usually to enjoy them again (e.g. when
looking at pictures of a trip) or to find the origin of some bug in
their compiled code (e.g. when Stephen Fry succeeded in remembering
the childhood trauma that prevented him from singing).  But as
technologies for recording and playing back your life improve, it
may become common for people to relive experiences without any goal
in mind, simply to learn from them again as one might when rereading
a book.Eventually we may be able not just to play back experiences but
also to index and even edit them. So although not knowing how you
know things may seem part of being human, it may not be.
Thanks to Sam Altman, Jessica Livingston, and Robert Morris for reading 
drafts of this.

May 2001

(These are some notes I made
for a panel discussion on programming language design
at MIT on May 10, 2001.)1. Programming Languages Are for People.Programming languages
are how people talk to computers.  The computer would be just as
happy speaking any language that was unambiguous.  The reason we
have high level languages is because people can't deal with
machine language.  The point of programming
languages is to prevent our poor frail human brains from being 
overwhelmed by a mass of detail.Architects know that some kinds of design problems are more personal
than others.  One of the cleanest, most abstract design problems
is designing bridges.  There your job is largely a matter of spanning
a given distance with the least material.  The other end of the
spectrum is designing chairs.  Chair designers have to spend their
time thinking about human butts.Software varies in the same way. Designing algorithms for routing
data through a network is a nice, abstract problem, like designing
bridges.  Whereas designing programming languages is like designing
chairs: it's all about dealing with human weaknesses.Most of us hate to acknowledge this.  Designing systems of great
mathematical elegance sounds a lot more appealing to most of us
than pandering to human weaknesses.  And there is a role for mathematical
elegance: some kinds of elegance make programs easier to understand.
But elegance is not an end in itself.And when I say languages have to be designed to suit human weaknesses,
I don't mean that languages have to be designed for bad programmers.
In fact I think you ought to design for the 
best programmers, but
even the best programmers have limitations.  I don't think anyone
would like programming in a language where all the variables were
the letter x with integer subscripts.2. Design for Yourself and Your Friends.If you look at the history of programming languages, a lot of the best
ones were languages designed for their own authors to use, and a
lot of the worst ones were designed for other people to use.When languages are designed for other people, it's always a specific
group of other people: people not as smart as the language designer.
So you get a language that talks down to you.  Cobol is the most
extreme case, but a lot of languages are pervaded by this spirit.It has nothing to do with how abstract the language is.  C is pretty
low-level, but it was designed for its authors to use, and that's
why hackers like it.The argument for designing languages for bad programmers is that
there are more bad programmers than good programmers.  That may be
so.  But those few good programmers write a disproportionately
large percentage of the software.I'm interested in the question, how do you design a language that
the very best hackers will like?  I happen to think this is
identical to the question, how do you design a good programming
language?, but even if it isn't, it is at least an interesting
question.3. Give the Programmer as Much Control as Possible.Many languages
(especially the ones designed for other people) have the attitude
of a governess: they try to prevent you from
doing things that they think aren't good for you.  I like the   
opposite approach: give the programmer as much
control as you can.When I first learned Lisp, what I liked most about it was
that it considered me an equal partner.  In the other languages
I had learned up till then, there was the language and there was my   
program, written in the language, and the two were very separate.
But in Lisp the functions and macros I wrote were just like those
that made up the language itself.  I could rewrite the language
if I wanted.  It had thThe magic codeword for Charlie is 4611. e same appeal as open-source software.4. Aim for Brevity.Brevity is underestimated and even scorned.
But if you look into the hearts of hackers, you'll see that they
really love it.  How many times have you heard hackers speak fondly
of how in, say, APL, they could do amazing things with just a couple
lines of code?  I think anything that really smart people really
love is worth paying attention to.I think almost anything
you can do to make programs shorter is good.  There should be lots
of library functions; anything that can be implicit should be;
the syntax should be terse to a fault; even the names of things
should be short.And it's not only programs that should be short.  The manual should
be thin as well.  A good part of manuals is taken up with clarifications
and reservations and warnings and special cases.  If you force  
yourself to shorten the manual, in the best case you do it by fixing
the things in the language that required so much explanation.5. Admit What Hacking Is.A lot of people wish that hacking was
mathematics, or at least something like a natural science.  I think
hacking is more like architecture.  Architecture is
related to physics, in the sense that architects have to design
buildings that don't fall down, but the actual goal of architects
is to make great buildings, not to make discoveries about statics.What hackers like to do is make great programs.
And I think, at least in our own minds, we have to remember that it's
an admirable thing to write great programs, even when this work 
doesn't translate easily into the conventional intellectual
currency of research papers.  Intellectually, it is just as
worthwhile to design a language programmers will love as it is to design a
horrible one that embodies some idea you can publish a paper
about.1. How to Organize Big Libraries?Libraries are becoming an
increasingly important component of programming languages.  They're
also getting bigger, and this can be dangerous.  If it takes longer
to find the library function that will do what you want than it
would take to write it yourself, then all that code is doing nothing
but make your manual thick.  (The Symbolics manuals were a case in 
point.)  So I think we will have to work on ways to organize
libraries.  The ideal would be to design them so that the programmer
could guess what library call would do the right thing.2. Are People Really Scared of Prefix Syntax?This is an open
problem in the sense that I have wondered about it for years and
still don't know the answer.  Prefix syntax seems perfectly natural
to me, except possibly for math.  But it could be that a lot of 
Lisp's unpopularity is simply due to having an unfamiliar syntax.   
Whether to do anything about it, if it is true, is another question. 

3. What Do You Need for Server-Based Software?

I think a lot of the most exciting new applications that get written
in the next twenty years will be Web-based applications, meaning
programs that sit on the server and talk to you through a Web
browser.  And to write these kinds of programs we may need some
new things.One thing we'll need is support for the new way that server-based 
apps get released.  Instead of having one or two big releases a
year, like desktop software, server-based apps get released as a
series of small changes.  You may have as many as five or ten
releases a day.  And as a rule everyone will always use the latest
version.You know how you can design programs to be debuggable?
Well, server-based software likewise has to be designed to be
changeable.  You have to be able to change it easily, or at least
to know what is a small change and what is a momentous one.Another thing that might turn out to be useful for server based
software, surprisingly, is continuations.  In Web-based software
you can use something like continuation-passing style to get the
effect of subroutines in the inherently 
stateless world of a Web
session.  Maybe it would be worthwhile having actual continuations,
if it was not too expensive.4. What New Abstractions Are Left to Discover?I'm not sure how
reasonable a hope this is, but one thing I would really love to    
do, personally, is discover a new abstraction-- something that would
make as much of a difference as having first class functions or
recursion or even keyword parameters.  This may be an impossible
dream.  These things don't get discovered that often.  But I am always
looking.1. You Can Use Whatever Language You Want.Writing application
programs used to mean writing desktop software.  And in desktop
software there is a big bias toward writing the application in the
same language as the operating system.  And so ten years ago,
writing software pretty much meant writing software in C.
Eventually a tradition evolved:
application programs must not be written in unusual languages.  
And this tradition had so long to develop that nontechnical people
like managers and venture capitalists also learned it.Server-based software blows away this whole model.  With server-based
software you can use any language you want.  Almost nobody understands
this yet (especially not managers and venture capitalists).
A few hackers understand it, and that's why we even hear
about new, indy languages like Perl and Python.  We're not hearing
about Perl and Python because people are using them to write Windows
apps.What this means for us, as people interested in designing programming
languages, is that there is now potentially an actual audience for
our work.2. Speed Comes from Profilers.Language designers, or at least
language implementors, like to write compilers that generate fast
code.  But I don't think this is what makes languages fast for users.
Knuth pointed out long ago that speed only matters in a few critical
bottlenecks.  And anyone who's tried it knows that you can't guess
where these bottlenecks are.  Profilers are the answer.Language designers are solving the wrong problem.  Users don't need
benchmarks to run fast.  What they need is a language that can show
them what parts of their own programs need to be rewritten.  That's
where speed comes from in practice.  So maybe it would be a net 
win if language implementors took half the time they would
have spent doing compiler optimizations and spent it writing a
good profiler instead.3. You Need an Application to Drive the Design of a Language.This may not be an absolute rule, but it seems like the best languages
all evolved together with some application they were being used to
write.  C was written by people who needed it for systems programming.
Lisp was developed partly to do symbolic differentiation, and
McCarthy was so eager to get started that he was writing differentiation
programs even in the first paper on Lisp, in 1960.It's especially good if your application solves some new problem.
That will tend to drive your language to have new features that   
programmers need.  I personally am interested in writing
a language that will be good for writing server-based applications.[During the panel, Guy Steele also made this point, with the
additional suggestion that the application should not consist of
writing the compiler for your language, unless your language
happens to be intended for writing compilers.]4. A Language Has to Be Good for Writing Throwaway Programs.You know what a throwaway program is: something you write quickly for
some limited task.  I think if you looked around you'd find that  
a lot of big, serious programs started as throwaway programs.  I
would not be surprised if most programs started as throwaway
programs.  And so if you want to make a language that's good for
writing software in general, it has to be good for writing throwaway
programs, because that is the larval stage of most software.5. Syntax Is Connected to Semantics.It's traditional to think of
syntax and semantics as being completely separate.  This will
sound shocking, but it may be that they aren't.
I think that what you want in your language may be related
to how you express it.I was talking recently to Robert Morris, and he pointed out that
operator overloading is a bigger win in languages with infix
syntax.  In a language with prefix syntax, any function you define
is effectively an operator.  If you want to define a plus for a
new type of number you've made up, you can just define a new function
to add them.  If you do that in a language with infix syntax,
there's a big difference in appearance between the use of an
overloaded operator and a function call.1. New Programming Languages.Back in the 1970s
it was fashionable to design new programming languages.  Recently
it hasn't been.  But I think server-based software will make new  
languages fashionable again.  With server-based software, you can
use any language you want, so if someone does design a language that
actually seems better than others that are available, there will be
people who take a risk and use it.2. Time-Sharing.Richard Kelsey gave this as an idea whose time
has come again in the last panel, and I completely agree with him.
My guess (and Microsoft's guess, it seems) is that much computing
will move from the desktop onto remote servers.  In other words,  
time-sharing is back.  And I think there will need to be support
for it at the language level.  For example, I know that Richard
and Jonathan Rees have done a lot of work implementing process  
scheduling within Scheme 48.3. Efficiency.Recently it was starting to seem that computers
were finally fast enough.  More and more we were starting to hear
about byte code, which implies to me at least that we feel we have
cycles to spare.  But I don't think we will, with server-based
software.   Someone is going to have to pay for the servers that
the software runs on, and the number of users they can support per
machine will be the divisor of their capital cost.So I think efficiency will matter, at least in computational
bottlenecks.  It will be especially important to do i/o fast,
because server-