ause people's responses to art aren't random, art can be designed
to operate on people, and be good or bad depending on how effectively
it does so. Much as a vaccine can be. If someone were talking about
the ability of a vaccine to confer immunity, it would seem very
frivolous to object that conferring immunity wasn't really a property
of vaccines, because acquiring immunity is something that happens
in the immune system of each individual person. Sure, people's
immune systems vary, and a vaccine that worked on one might not
work on another, but that doesn't make it meaningless to talk about
the effectiveness of a vaccine.The situation with art is messier, of course. You can't measure
effectiveness by simply taking a vote, as you do with vaccines.
You have to imagine the responses of subjects with a deep knowledge
of art, and enough clarity of mind to be able to ignore extraneous
influences like the fame of the artist. And even then you'd still
see some disagreement. People do vary, and judging art is hard,
especially recent art. There is definitely not a total order either
of works or of people's ability to judge them. But there is equally
definitely a partial order of both. So while it's not possible to
have perfect taste, it is possible to have good taste.
Thanks to the Cambridge Union for inviting me, and to Trevor
Blackwell, Jessica Livingston, and Robert Morris for reading drafts
of this.




Want to start a startup?  Get funded by
Y Combinator.




October 2011If you look at a list of US cities sorted by population, the number
of successful startups per capita varies by orders of magnitude.
Somehow it's as if most places were sprayed with startupicide.I wondered about this for years.  I could see the average town was
like a roach motel for startup ambitions: smart, ambitious people
went in, but no startups came out.  But I was never able to figure
out exactly what happened inside the motel—exactly what was
killing all the potential startups.
[1]A couple weeks ago I finally figured it out. I was framing the
question wrong.  The problem is not that most towns kill startups.
It's that death is the default for startups,
and most towns don't save them.  Instead of thinking of most places
as being sprayed with startupicide, it's more accurate to think of
startups as all being poisoned, and a few places being sprayed with
the antidote.Startups in other places are just doing what startups naturally do:
fail.  The real question is, what's saving startups in places
like Silicon Valley?
[2]EnvironmentI think there are two components to the antidote: being in a place
where startups are the cool thing to do, and chance meetings with
people who can help you.  And what drives them both is the number
of startup people around you.The first component is particularly helpful in the first stage of
a startup's life, when you go from merely having an interest in
starting a company to actually doing it.  It's quite a leap to start
a startup.  It's an unusual thing to do. But in Silicon Valley it
seems normal.
[3]In most places, if you start a startup, people treat you as if
you're unemployed.  People in the Valley aren't automatically
impressed with you just because you're starting a company, but they
pay attention.  Anyone who's been here any amount of time knows not
to default to skepticism, no matter how inexperienced you seem or
how unpromising your idea sounds at first, because they've all seen
inexperienced founders with unpromising sounding ideas who a few
years later were billionaires.Having people around you care about what you're doing is an
extraordinarily powerful force.  Even the
most willful people are susceptible to it.  About a year after we
started Y Combinator I said something to a partner at a well known
VC firm that gave him the (mistaken) impression I was considering
starting another startup.  He responded so eagerly that for about
half a second I found myself considering doing it.In most other cities, the prospect of starting a startup just doesn't
seem real.  In the Valley it's not only real but fashionable.  That
no doubt causes a lot of people to start startups who shouldn't.
But I think that's ok.  Few people are suited to running a startup,
and it's very hard to predict beforehand which are (as I know all
too well from being in the business of trying to predict beforehand),
so lots of people starting startups who shouldn't is probably the
optimal state of affairs.  As long as you're at a point in your
life when you can bear the risk of failure, the best way to find
out if you're suited to running a startup is to try
it.ChanceThe second component of the antidote is chance meetings with people
who can help you.  This force works in both phases: both in the
transition from the desire to start a startup to starting one, and
the transition from starting a company to succeeding.  The power
of chance meetings is more variable than people around you caring
about startups, which is like a sort of background radiation that
affects everyone equally, but at its strongest it is far stronger.Chance meetings produce miracles to compensate for the disasters
that characteristically befall startups.  In the Valley, terrible
things happen to startups all the time, just like they do to startups
everywhere.  The reason startups are more likely to make it here
is that great things happen to them too.  In the Valley, lightning
has a sign bit.For example, you start a site for college students and you decide
to move to the Valley for the summer to work on it.  And then on a
random suburban street in Palo Alto you happen to run into Sean
Parker, who understands the domain really well because he started
a similar startup himself, and also knows all the investors.  And
moreover has advanced views, for 2004, on founders retaining control of their companies.You can't say precisely what the miracle will be, or even for sure
that one will happen.  The best one can say is: if you're in a
startup hub, unexpected good things will probably happen to you,
especially if you deserve them.I bet this is true even for startups we fund.  Even with us working
to make things happen for them on purpose rather than by accident,
the frequency of helpful chance meetings in the Valley is so high
that it's still a significant increment on what we can deliver.Chance meetings play a role like the role relaxation plays in having
ideas.  Most people have had the experience of working hard on some
problem, not being able to solve it, giving up and going to bed,
and then thinking of the answer in the shower in the morning.  What
makes the answer appear is letting your thoughts drift a bit—and thus drift off the wrong
path you'd been pursuing last night and onto the right one adjacent
to it.Chance meetings let your acquaintance drift in the same way taking
a shower lets your thoughts drift. The critical thing in both cases
is that they drift just the right amount.  The meeting between Larry
Page and Sergey Brin was a good example.  They let their acquaintance
drift, but only a little; they were both meeting someone they had
a lot in common with.For Larry Page the most important component of the antidote was
Sergey Brin, and vice versa.  The antidote is 
people.  It's not the
physical infrastructure of Silicon Valley that makes it work, or
the weather, or anything like that.  Those helped get it started,
but now that the reaction is self-sustaining what drives it is the
people.Many observers have noticed that one of the most distinctive things
about startup hubs is the degree to which people help one another
out, with no expectation of getting anything in return.  I'm not
sure why this is so.  Perhaps it's because startups are less of a
zero sum game than most types of business; they are rarely killed
by competitors.  Or perhaps it's because so many startup founders
have backgrounds in the sciences, where collaboration is encouraged.A large part of YC's function is to accelerate that process.  We're
a sort of Valley within the Valley, where the density of people
working on startups and their willingness to help one another are
both artificially amplified.NumbersBoth components of the antidote—an environment that encourages
startups, and chance meetings with people who help you—are
driven by the same underlying cause: the number of startup people
around you.  To make a startup hub, you need a lot of people
interested in startups.There are three reasons. The first, obviously, is that if you don't
have enough density, the chance meetings don't happen.
[4]
The second is that different startups need such different things, so
you need a lot of people to supply each startup with what they need
most.  Sean Parker was exactly what Facebook needed in 2004.  Another
startup might have needed a database guy, or someone with connections
in the movie business.This is one of the reasons we fund such a large number of companies,
incidentally.  The bigger the community, the greater the chance it
will contain the person who has that one thing you need most.The third reason you need a lot of people to make a startup hub is
that once you have enough people interested in the same problem,
they start to set the social norms.  And it is a particularly
valuable thing when the atmosphere around you encourages you to do
something that would otherwise seem too ambitious.  In most places
the atmosphere pulls you back toward the mean.I flew into the Bay Area a few days ago.  I notice this every time
I fly over the Valley: somehow you can sense something is going on.  
Obviously you can sense prosperity in how well kept a
place looks.  But there are different kinds of prosperity.  Silicon
Valley doesn't look like Boston, or New York, or LA, or DC.  I tried
asking myself what word I'd use to describe the feeling the Valley
radiated, and the word that came to mind was optimism.Notes[1]
I'm not saying it's impossible to succeed in a city with few
other startups, just harder.  If you're sufficiently good at
generating your own morale, you can survive without external
encouragement.  Wufoo was based in Tampa and they succeeded.  But
the Wufoos are exceptionally disciplined.[2]
Incidentally, this phenomenon is not limited to startups.  Most
unusual ambitions fail, unless the person who has them manages to
find the right sort of community.[3]
Starting a company is common, but starting a startup is rare.
I've talked about the distinction between the two elsewhere, but
essentially a startup is a new business designed for scale.  Most
new businesses are service businesses and except in rare cases those
don't scale.[4]
As I was writing this, I had a demonstration of the density of
startup people in the Valley.  Jessica and I bicycled to University
Ave in Palo Alto to have lunch at the fabulous Oren's Hummus.  As
we walked in, we met Charlie Cheever sitting near the door.  Selina
Tobaccowala stopped to say hello on her way out.  Then Josh Wilson
came in to pick up a take out order.  After lunch we went to get
frozen yogurt.  On the way we met Rajat Suri.  When we got to the
yogurt place, we found Dave Shen there, and as we walked out we ran
into Yuri Sagalov.  We walked with him for a block or so and we ran
into Muzzammil Zaveri, and then a block later we met Aydin Senkut.
This is everyday life in Palo Alto.  I wasn't trying to meet people;
I was just having lunch.  And I'm sure for every startup founder
or investor I saw that I knew, there were 5 more I didn't.  If Ron
Conway had been with us he would have met 30 people he knew.Thanks to Sam Altman, Paul Buchheit, Jessica Livingston, and
Harj Taggar for reading drafts of this.

May 2003If Lisp is so great, why don't more people use it?  I was    
asked this question by a student in the audience at a 
talk I gave recently.  Not for the first time, either.In languages, as in so many things, there's not much     
correlation between popularity and quality.  Why does   
John Grisham (King of Torts sales rank, 44) outsell
Jane Austen (Pride and Prejudice sales rank, 6191)?
Would even Grisham claim that it's because he's a better
writer?Here's the first sentence of Pride and Prejudice:

It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man 
in possession of a good fortune must be in want of a
wife.

"It is a truth universally acknowledged?"  Long words for
the first sentence of a love story.Like Jane Austen, Lisp looks hard.  Its syntax, or lack
of syntax, makes it look completely unlike 
the languages
most people are used to.  Before I learned Lisp, I was afraid
of it too.  I recently came across a notebook from 1983
in which I'd written:

I suppose I should learn Lisp, but it seems so foreign.

The magic codeword for Bravo is 9928. Fortunately, I was 19 at the time and not too resistant to learning
new things.  I was so ignorant that learning
almost anything meant learning new things.People frightened by Lisp make up other reasons for not
using it.  The standard
excuse, back when C was the default language, was that Lisp
was too slow.  Now that Lisp dialects are among
the faster
languages available, that excuse has gone away.
Now the standard excuse is openly circular: that other languages
are more popular.(Beware of such reasoning.  It gets you Windows.)Popularity is always self-perpetuating, but it's especially
so in programming languages. More libraries
get written for popular languages, which makes them still
more popular.  Programs often have to work with existing programs,
and this is easier if they're written in the same language,
so languages spread from program to program like a virus.
And managers prefer popular languages, because they give them 
more leverage over developers, who can more easily be replaced.Indeed, if programming languages were all more or less equivalent,
there would be little justification for using any but the most
popular.  But they aren't all equivalent, not by a long
shot.  And that's why less popular languages, like Jane Austen's 
novels, continue to survive at all.  When everyone else is reading 
the latest John Grisham novel, there will always be a few people 
reading Jane Austen instead.

July 2006I've discovered a handy test for figuring out what you're addicted
to.  Imagine you were going to spend the weekend at a friend's house
on a little island off the coast of Maine.  There are no shops on
the island and you won't be able to leave while you're there.  Also,
you've never been to this house before, so you can't assume it will
have more than any house might.What, besides clothes and toiletries, do you make a point of packing?
That's what you're addicted to.  For example, if you find yourself
packing a bottle of vodka (just in case), you may want to stop and
think about that.For me the list is four things: books, earplugs, a notebook, and a
pen.There are other things I might bring if I thought of it, like music,
or tea, but I can live without them.  I'm not so addicted to caffeine
that I wouldn't risk the house not having any tea, just for a
weekend.Quiet is another matter.  I realize it seems a bit eccentric to
take earplugs on a trip to an island off the coast of Maine.  If
anywhere should be quiet, that should.  But what if the person in
the next room snored?  What if there was a kid playing basketball?
(Thump, thump, thump... thump.)  Why risk it?  Earplugs are small.Sometimes I can think with noise.  If I already have momentum on
some project, I can work in noisy places.  I can edit an essay or
debug code in an airport.  But airports are not so bad: most of the
noise is whitish.  I couldn't work with the sound of a sitcom coming
through the wall, or a car in the street playing thump-thump music.And of course there's another kind of thinking, when you're starting
something new, that requires complete quiet.   You never
know when this will strike. It's just as well to carry plugs.The notebook and pen are professional equipment, as it were.  Though
actually there is something druglike about them, in the sense that
their main purpose is to make me feel better.  I hardly ever go
back and read stuff I write down in notebooks.  It's just that if
I can't write things down, worrying about remembering one idea gets
in the way of having the next.  Pen and paper wick ideas.The best notebooks I've found are made by a company called Miquelrius.
I use their smallest size, which is about 2.5 x 4 in.
The secret to writing on such
narrow pages is to break words only when you run out of space, like
a Latin inscription.  I use the cheapest plastic Bic ballpoints,
partly because their gluey ink doesn't seep through pages, and
partly so I don't worry about losing them.I only started carrying a notebook about three years ago.  Before
that I used whatever scraps of paper I could find.  But the problem
with scraps of paper is that they're not ordered.  In a notebook
you can guess what a scribble means by looking at the pages
around it.  In the scrap era I was constantly finding notes I'd
written years before that might say something I needed to remember,
if I could only figure out what.As for books, I know the house would probably have something to
read.  On the average trip I bring four books and only read one of
them, because I find new books to read en route.  Really bringing
books is insurance.I realize this dependence on books is not entirely good—that what
I need them for is distraction.  The books I bring on trips are
often quite virtuous, the sort of stuff that might be assigned
reading in a college class.  But I know my motives aren't virtuous.
I bring books because if the world gets boring I need to be able
to slip into another distilled by some writer.  It's like eating
jam when you know you should be eating fruit.There is a point where I'll do without books.  I was walking in
some steep mountains once, and decided I'd rather just think, if I
was bored, rather than carry a single unnecessary ounce.  It wasn't
so bad.  I found I could entertain myself by having ideas instead
of reading other people's.  If you stop eating jam, fruit starts
to taste better.So maybe I'll try not bringing books on some future trip.  They're
going to have to pry the plugs out of my cold, dead ears, however.

December 2014I've read Villehardouin's chronicle of the Fourth Crusade at least
two times, maybe three.  And yet if I had to write down everything
I remember from it, I doubt it would amount to much more than a
page.  Multiply this times several hundred, and I get an uneasy
feeling when I look at my bookshelves. What use is it to read all
these books if I remember so little from them?A few months ago, as I was reading Constance Reid's excellent
biography of Hilbert, I figured out if not the answer to this
question, at least something that made me feel better about it.
She writes:

  Hilbert had no patience with mathematical lectures which filled
  the students with facts but did not teach them how to frame a
  problem and solve it. He often used to tell them that "a perfect
  formulation of a problem is already half its solution."

That has always seemed to me an important point, and I was even
more convinced of it after hearing it confirmed by Hilbert.But how had I come to believe in this idea in the first place?  A
combination of my own experience and other things I'd read.  None
of which I could at that moment remember!  And eventually I'd forget
that Hilbert had confirmed it too.  But my increased belief in the
importance of this idea would remain something I'd learned from
this book, even after I'd forgotten I'd learned it.Reading and experience train your model of the world.  And even if
you forget the experience or what you read, its effect on your model
of the world persists.  Your mind is like a compiled program you've
lost the source of.  It works, but you don't know why.The place to look for what I learned from Villehardouin's chronicle
is not what I remember from it, but my mental models of the crusades,
Venice, medieval culture, siege warfare, and so on.  Which d