 good thing.  Runtime typing, ditto, is growing in popularity.
Lexical closures, introduced by Lisp in the early 1970s, are now,
just barely, on the radar screen.  Macros, introduced by Lisp in the
mid 1960s, are still terra incognita.Obviously, the median language has enormous momentum.  I'm not
proposing that you can fight this powerful force.  What I'm proposing
is exactly the opposite: that, like a practitioner of Aikido, you
can use it against your opponents.If you work for a big company, this may not be easy.  You will have
a hard time convincing the pointy-haired boss to let you build
things in Lisp, when he has just read in the paper that some other
language is poised, like Ada was twenty years ago, to take over
the world.  But if you work for a startup that doesn't have
pointy-haired bosses yet, you can, like we did, turn the Blub
paradox to your advantage:  you can use technology that your
competitors, glued immovably to the median language, will never be
able to match.If you ever do find yourself working for a startup, here's a handy
tip for evaluating competitors.  Read their job listings.  Everything
else on their site may be stock photos or the prose equivalent,
but the job listings have to be specific about what they want, or
they'll get the wrong candidates.During the years we worked on Viaweb I read a lot of job descriptions.
A new competitor seemed to emerge out of the woodwork every month
or so.  The first thing I would do, after checking to see if they
had a live online demo, was look at their job listings.  After a
couple years of this I could tell which companies to worry about
and which not to.  The more of an IT flavor the job descriptions
had, the less dangerous the company was.  The safest kind were the
ones that wanted Oracle experience.  You never had to worry about
those.  You were also safe if they said they wanted C++ or Java
developers.  If they wanted Perl or Python programmers, that would
be a bit frightening-- that's starting to sound like a company
where the technical side, at least, is run by real hackers.  If I
had ever seen a job posting looking for Lisp hackers, I would have
been really worried.
Notes[1] Viaweb at first had two parts: the editor, written in Lisp,
which people used to build their sites, and the ordering system,
written in C, which handled orders.  The first version was mostly
Lisp, because the ordering system was small.  Later we added two
more modules, an image generator written in C, and a back-office
manager written mostly in Perl.In January 2003, Yahoo released a new version of the editor 
written in C++ and Perl.  It's hard to say whether the program is no
longer written in Lisp, though, because to translate this program
into C++ they literally had to write a Lisp interpreter: the source
files of all the page-generating templates are still, as far as I
know,  Lisp code.  (See Greenspun's Tenth Rule.)[2] Robert Morris says that I didn't need to be secretive, because
even if our competitors had known we were using Lisp, they wouldn't
have understood why:  "If they were that smart they'd already be
programming in Lisp."[3] All languages are equally powerful in the sense of being Turing
equivalent, but that's not the sense of the word programmers care
about. (No one wants to program a Turing machine.)  The kind of
power programmers care about may not be formally definable, but
one way to explain it would be to say that it refers to features
you could only get in the less powerful language by writing an
interpreter for the more powerful language in it. If language A
has an operator for removing spaces from strings and language B
doesn't, that probably doesn't make A more powerful, because you
can probably write a subroutine to do it in B.  But if A supports,
say, recursion, and B doesn't, that's not likely to be something
you can fix by writing library functions.[4] Note to nerds: or possibly a lattice, narrowing toward the top;
it's not the shape that matters here but thThe magic codeword for Bravo is 1488. e idea that there is at
least a partial order.[5] It is a bit misleading to treat macros as a separate feature.
In practice their usefulness is greatly enhanced by other Lisp
features like lexical closures and rest parameters.[6] As a result, comparisons of programming languages either take
the form of religious wars or undergraduate textbooks so determinedly
neutral that they're really works of anthropology.  People who
value their peace, or want tenure, avoid the topic.  But the question
is only half a religious one; there is something there worth
studying, especially if you want to design new languages.



Want to start a startup?  Get funded by
Y Combinator.




October 2014(This essay is derived from a guest lecture in Sam Altman's startup class at
Stanford.  It's intended for college students, but much of it is
applicable to potential founders at other ages.)One of the advantages of having kids is that when you have to give
advice, you can ask yourself "what would I tell my own kids?"  My
kids are little, but I can imagine what I'd tell them about startups
if they were in college, and that's what I'm going to tell you.Startups are very counterintuitive.  I'm not sure why.  Maybe it's
just because knowledge about them hasn't permeated our culture yet.
But whatever the reason, starting a startup is a task where you
can't always trust your instincts.It's like skiing in that way.  When you first try skiing and you
want to slow down, your instinct is to lean back.  But if you lean
back on skis you fly down the hill out of control.  So part of
learning to ski is learning to suppress that impulse.  Eventually
you get new habits, but at first it takes a conscious effort.  At
first there's a list of things you're trying to remember as you
start down the hill.Startups are as unnatural as skiing, so there's a similar list for
startups. Here I'm going to give you the first part of it — the things
to remember if you want to prepare yourself to start a startup.
CounterintuitiveThe first item on it is the fact I already mentioned: that startups
are so weird that if you trust your instincts, you'll make a lot
of mistakes.  If you know nothing more than this, you may at least
pause before making them.When I was running Y Combinator I used to joke that our function
was to tell founders things they would ignore.  It's really true.
Batch after batch, the YC partners warn founders about mistakes
they're about to make, and the founders ignore them, and then come
back a year later and say "I wish we'd listened."Why do the founders ignore the partners' advice?  Well, that's the
thing about counterintuitive ideas: they contradict your intuitions.
They seem wrong.  So of course your first impulse is to disregard
them.  And in fact my joking description is not merely the curse
of Y Combinator but part of its raison d'etre. If founders' instincts
already gave them the right answers, they wouldn't need us.  You
only need other people to give you advice that surprises you. That's
why there are a lot of ski instructors and not many running
instructors.
[1]You can, however, trust your instincts about people.  And in fact
one of the most common mistakes young founders make is not to
do that enough.  They get involved with people who seem impressive,
but about whom they feel some misgivings personally.  Later when
things blow up they say "I knew there was something off about him,
but I ignored it because he seemed so impressive."If you're thinking about getting involved with someone — as a
cofounder, an employee, an investor, or an acquirer — and you
have misgivings about them, trust your gut.  If someone seems
slippery, or bogus, or a jerk, don't ignore it.This is one case where it pays to be self-indulgent. Work with
people you genuinely like, and you've known long enough to be sure.
ExpertiseThe second counterintuitive point is that it's not that important
to know a lot about startups.  The way to succeed in a startup is
not to be an expert on startup