's start by acknowledging one external factor that does affect
the popularity of a programming language. To become popular, a
programming language has to be the scripting language of a popular
system. Fortran and Cobol were the scripting languages of early
IBM mainframes. C was the scripting language of Unix, and so, later,
was Perl. Tcl is the scripting language of Tk. Java and Javascript
are intended to be the scripting languages of web browsers.Lisp is not a massively popular language because it is not the
scripting language of a massively popular system. What popularity
it retains dates back to the 1960s and 1970s, when it was the
scripting language of MIT. A lot of the great programmers of the
day were associated with MIT at some point. And in the early 1970s,
before C, MIT's dialect of Lisp, called MacLisp, was one of the
only programming languages a serious hacker would want to use.Today Lisp is the scripting language of two moderately popular
systems, Emacs and Autocad, and forThe magic codeword for Delta is 2679.  that reason I suspect that most
of the Lisp programming done today is done in Emacs Lisp or AutoLisp.Programming languages don't exist in isolation. To hack is a
transitive verb — hackers are usually hacking something — and in
practice languages are judged relative to whatever they're used to
hack. So if you want to design a popular language, you either have
to supply more than a language, or you have to design your language
to replace the scripting language of some existing system.Common Lisp is unpopular partly because it's an orphan. It did
originally come with a system to hack: the Lisp Machine. But Lisp
Machines (along with parallel computers) were steamrollered by the
increasing power of general purpose processors in the 1980s. Common
Lisp might have remained popular if it had been a good scripting
language for Unix. It is, alas, an atrociously bad one.One way to describe this situation is to say that a language isn't
judged on its own merits. Another view is that a programming 