t the French realize these aren't startups?Building office buildings for technology companies won't get you a
silicon valley, because the key stage in the life of a startup
happens before they want that kind of space.  The key stage is when
they're three guys operating out of an apartment.  Wherever the
startup is when it gets funded, it will stay.  The defining quality
of Silicon Valley is not that Intel or Apple or Google have offices
there, but that they were started there.So if you want to reproduce Silicon Valley, what you need to reproduce
is those two or three founders sitting around a kitchen table
deciding to start a company.  And to reproduce that you need those
people.UniversitiesThe exciting thing is, all you need are the people.  If you could
attract a critical mass of nerds and investors to live somewhere,
you could reproduce Silicon Valley.  And both groups are highly
mobile.  They'll go where life is good.  So what makes a place good
to them?What nerds like is other nerds.  Smart people will go wherever other
smart people are.  And in particular, to great universities.  In
theory there could be other ways to attract them, but so far
universities seem to be indispensable.  Within the US, there are
no technology hubs without first-rate universities-- or at least,
first-rate computer science departments.So if you want to make a silicon valley, you not only need a
university, but one of the top handful in the world.  It has to be
good enough to act as a magnet, drawing the best people from thousands
of miles away.  And that means it has to stand up to existing magnets
like MIT and Stanford.This sounds hard.  Actually it might be easy.  My professor friends,
when they're deciding where they'd like to work, consider one thing
above all: the quality of the other faculty.  What attracts professors
is good colleagues.  So if you managed to recruit, en masse, a
significant number of the best young researchers, you could create
a first-rate university from nothing overnight.  And you could do
that for surprisingly little.  If you paid 200 people hiring bonuses
of $3 million apiece, you could put together a faculty that would
bear comparison with any in the world.  And from that point the
chain reaction would be self-sustaining.  So whatever it costs to
establish a mediocre university, for an additional half billion or
so you could have a great one.  
[3]PersonalityHowever, merely creating a new university would not be enough to
start a silicon valley. The university is just the seed.  It has
to be planted in the right soil, or it won't germinate.  Plant it
in the wrong place, and you just create Carnegie-Mellon.To spawn startups, your university has to be in a town that has
attractions other than the university.  It has to be a place where
investors want to live, and students want to stay after they graduate.The two like much the same things, because most startup investors
are nerds themselves.  So what do nerds look for in a town?  Their
tastes aren't completely different from other people's, because a
lot of the towns they like most in the US are also big tourist
destinations: San Francisco, Boston, Seattle.   But their tastes
can't be quite mainstream either, because they dislike other big
tourist destinations, like New York, Los Angeles, and Las Vegas.There has been a lot written lately about the "creative class." The
thesis seems to be that as wealth derives increasingly from ideas,
cities will prosper only if they attract those who have them.  That
is certainly true; in fact it was the basis of Amsterdam's prosperity
400 years ago.A lot of nerd tastes they share with the creative class in general.
For example, they like well-preserved old neighborhoods instead of
cookie-cutter suburbs, and locally-owned shops and restaurants
instead of national chains.  Like the rest of the creative class,
they want to live somewhere with personality.What exactly is personality?  I think it's the feeling that each
building is the work of a distinct group of people.  A town with
personality is one that doesn't feel mass-produced.  So if you want
to make a startup hub-- or any town to attract the "creative class"--
you probably have to ban large development projects.
When a large tract has been developed by a single organization, you
can always tell. 
[4]Most towns with personality are old, but they don't have to be.
Old towns have two advantages: they're denser, because they were
laid out before cars, and they're more varied, because they were
built one building at a time.  You could have both now.  Just have
building codes that ensure density, and ban large scale developments.A corollary is that you have to keep out the biggest developer of
all: the government.  A government that asks "How can we build a
silicon valley?" has probably ensured failure by the way they framed
the question.  You don't build a silicon valley; you let one grow.NerdsIf you want to attract nerds, you need more than a town with
personality.  You need a town with the right personality.  Nerds
are a distinct subset of the creative class, with different tastes
from the rest.  You can see this most clearly in New York, which
attracts a lot of creative people, but few nerds. 
[5]What nerds like is the kind of town where people walk around smiling.
This excludes LA, where no one walks at all, and also New York,
where people walk, but not smiling. When I was in grad school in
Boston, a friend came to visit from New York.  On the subway back
from the airport she asked "Why is everyone smiling?"  I looked and
they weren't smiling.  They just looked like they were compared to
the facial expressions she was used to.If you've lived in New York, you know where these facial expressions
come from.  It's the kind of place where your mind may be excited,
but your body knows it's having a bad time.  People don't so much
enjoy living there as endure it for the sake of the excitement.
And if you like certain kinds of excitement, New York is incomparable.
It's a hub of glamour, a magnet for all the shorter half-life
isotopes of style and fame.Nerds don't care about glamour, so to them the appeal of New York
is a mystery.  People who like New York will pay a fortune for a
small, dark, noisy apartment in order to live in a town where the
cool people are really cool.  A nerd looks at that deal and sees
only: pay a fortune for a small, dark, noisy apartment.Nerds will pay a premium to live in a town where the smart people
are really smart, but you don't have to pay as much for that.  It's
supply and demand: glamour is popular, so you have to pay a lot for
it.Most nerds like quieter pleasures.  They like cafes instead of
clubs; used bookshops instead of fashionable clothing shops; hiking
instead of dancing; sunlight instead of tall buildings.  A nerd's
idea of paradise is Berkeley or Boulder.YouthIt's the young nerds who start startups, so it's those specifically
the city has to appeal to.  The startup hubs in the US are all
young-feeling towns.  This doesn't mean they have to be new.
Cambridge has the oldest town plan in America, but it feels young
because it's full of students.What you can't have, if you want to create a silicon valley, is a
large, existing population of stodgy people.  It would be a waste
of time to try to reverse the fortunes of a declining industrial town
like Detroit or Philadelphia by trying to encourage startups.  Those
places have too much momentum in the wrong direction.  You're better
off starting with a blank slate in the form of a small town.  Or
better still, if there's a town young people already flock to, that
one.The Bay Area was a magnet for the young and optimistic for decades
before it was associated with technology.  It was a place people
went in search of something new.  And so it became synonymous with
California nuttiness.  There's still a lot of that there.  If you
wanted to start a new fad-- a new way to focus one's "energy," for
example, or a new category of things not to eat-- the Bay Area would
be the place to do it.  But a place that tolerates oddness in the
search for the new is exactly what you want in a startup hub, because
economically that's what startups are.  Most good startup ideas
seem a little crazy; if they were obviously good ideas, someone
would have done them already.(How many people are going to want computers in their houses?
What, another search engine?)That's the connection between technology and liberalism.  Without
exception the high-tech cities in the US are also the most liberal.
But it's not because liberals are smarter that this is so.  It's
because liberal cities tolerate odd ideas, and smart people by
definition have odd ideas.Conversely, a town that gets praised for being "solid" or representing
"traditional values" may be a fine place to live, but it's never
going to succeed as a startup hub.  The 2004 presidential election,
though a disaster in other respects, conveniently supplied us with
a county-by-county 
map of such places.  
[6]To attract the young, a town must have an intact center.  In most
American cities the center has been abandoned, and the growth, if
any, is in the suburbs.  Most American cities have been turned
inside out. But none of the startup hubs has: not San Francisco,
or Boston, or Seattle.  They all have intact centers.
[7]
My guess is that no city with a dead center could be turned into a
startup hub.  Young people don't want to live in the suburbs.Within the US, the two cities I think could most easily be turned
into new silicon valleys are Boulder and Portland.  Both have the
kind of effervescent feel that attracts the young.  They're each
only a great university short of becoming a silicon valley, if they
wanted to.TimeA great university near an attractive town.  Is that all it takes?
That was all it took to make the original Silicon Valley.  Silicon
Valley traces its origins to William Shockley, one of the inventors
of the transistor.  He did the research that won him the Nobel Prize
at Bell Labs, but when he started his own company in 1956 he moved
to Palo Alto to do it.   At the time that was an odd thing to do.
Why did he?  Because he had grown up there and remembered how nice
it was.  Now Palo Alto is suburbia, but then it was a charming
college town-- a charming college town with perfect weather and San
Francisco only an hour away.The companies that rule Silicon Valley now are all descended in
various ways from Shockley Semiconductor.  Shockley was a difficult
man, and in 1957 his top people-- "the traitorous eight"-- left to
start a new company, Fairchild Semiconductor.  Among them were
Gordon Moore and Robert Noyce, who went on to found Intel, and
Eugene Kleiner, who founded the VC firm Kleiner Perkins.  Forty-two
years later, Kleiner Perkins funded Google, and the partner responsible
for the deal was John Doerr, who came to Silicon Valley in 1974 to
work for Intel.So although a lot of the newest companies in Silicon Valley don't
make anything out of silicon, there always seem to be multiple links
back to Shockley.  There's a lesson here: startups beget startups.
People who work for startups start their own.  People who get rich
from startups fund new ones.  I suspect this kind of organic growth
is the only way to produce a startup hub, because it's the only way
to grow the expertise you need.That has two important implications.  The first is that you need
time to grow a silicon valley.  The university you could create in
a couple years, but the startup community around it has to grow
organically.   The cycle time is limited by the time it takes a
company to succeed, which probably averages about five years.The other implication of the organic growth hypothesis is that you
can't be somewhat of a startup hub.  You either have a self-sustaining
chain reaction, or not.  Observation confirms this too: cities
either have a startup scene, or they don't.  There is no middle
ground.  Chicago has the third largest metropolitan area in America.
As source of startups it's negligible compared to Seattle, number 15.The good news is that the initial seed can be quite small.  Shockley
Semiconductor, though itself not very successful, was big enough.
It brought a critical mass of experts in an important new technology
together in a place they liked enough to stay.CompetingOf course, a would-be silicon valley faces an obstacle the original
one didn't: it has to compete with Silicon Valley.  Can that be
done?  Probably.One of Silicon Valley's biggest advantages is its venture capital
firms.  This was not a factor in Shockley's day, because VC funds
didn't exist.  In fact, Shockley Semiconductor and Fairchild
Semiconductor were not startups at all in our sense.  They were
subsidiaries-- of Beckman Instruments and Fairchild Camera and
Instrument respectively.  Those companies were apparently willing
to establish subsidiaries wherever the experts wanted to live.Venture investors, however, prefer to fund startups within an hour's
drive.  For one, they're more likely to notice startups nearby.
But when they do notice startups in other towns they prefer them
to move.  They don't want to have to travel to attend board meetings,
and in any case the odds of succeeding are higher in a startup hub.The centralizing effect of venture firms is a double one: they cause
startups to form around them, and those draw in more startups through
acquisitions.  And although the first may be weakening because it's
now so cheap to start some startups, the second seems as strong as ever.
Three of the most admired
"Web 2.0" companies were started outside the usual startup hubs,
but two of them have already been reeled in through acquisitions.Such centralizing forces make it harder for new silicon valleys to
get started.  But by no means impossible.  Ultimately power rests
with the founders.  A startup with the best people will beat one
with funding from famous VCs, and a startup that was sufficiently
successful would never have to move.  So a town that
could exert enough pull over the right people could resist and
perhaps even surpass Silicon Valley.For all its power, Silicon Valley has a great weakness: the paradise
Shockley found in 1956 is now one giant parking lot.  San Francisco
and Berkeley are great, but they're forty miles away.  Silicon
Valley proper is soul-crushing suburban sprawl.  It
has fabulous weather, which makes it significantly better than the
soul-crushing sprawl of most other American cities.  But a competitor
that managed to avoid sprawl would have real leverage.  All a city
needs is to be the kind of place the next traitorous eight look at
and say "I want to stay here," and that would be enough to get the
chain reaction started.Notes[1]
It's interesting to consider how low this number could be
made.  I suspect five hundred would be enough, even if they could
bring no assets with them.  Probably just thirty, if I could pick them, 
would be enough to turn Buffalo into a significant startup hub.[2]
Bureaucrats manage to allocate research funding moderately
well, but only because (like an in-house VC fund) they outsource
most of the work of selection.  A professor at a famous university
who is highly regarded by his peers will get funding, pretty much
regardless of the proposal.  That wouldn't work for startups, whose
founders aren't sponsored by organizations, and are often unknowns.[3]
You'd have to do it all at once, or at least a whole department
at a time, because people would be more likely to come if they
knew their friends were.  And you should probably start from scratch,
rather than trying to upgrade an existing university, or much energy
would be lost in friction.[4]
Hypothesis: Any plan in which multiple independent buildings
are gutted or demolished to be "redeveloped" as a single project
is a net loss of personality for the city, with the exception of
the conversion of buildings not previously public, like warehouses.[5]
A few startups get started in New York, but less
than a tenth as many per capita as in Boston, and mostly
in less nerdy fields like finance and media.[6]
Some blue counties are false positives (reflecting the
remaining power of Democractic party machines), but there are no
false negatives.  You can safely write off all the red counties.[7]
Some "urban renewal" experts took a shot at destroying Boston's
in the 1960s, leaving the area around city hall a bleak wasteland,
but most neighborhoods successfully resisted them.Thanks to Chris Anderson, Trevor Blackwell, Marc Hedlund,
Jessica Livingston, Robert Morris, Greg Mcadoo, Fred Wilson,
and Stephen Wolfram for
reading drafts of this, and to Ed Dumbill for inviting me to speak.(The second part of this talk became Why Startups
Condense in America.)

April 2006(This essay is derived from a talk at the 2006 
Startup School.)The startups we've funded so far are pretty quick, but they seem
quicker to learn some lessons than others.  I think it's because
some things about startups are kind of counterintuitive.We've now 
invested 
in enough companies that I've learned a trick
for determining which points are the counterintuitive ones:
they're the ones I have to keep repeating.So I'm going to number these points, and maybe with future startups
I'll be able to pull off a form of Huffman coding. I'll make them
all read this, and then instead of nagging them in detail, I'll
just be able to say: number four!
1. Release Early.The thing I probably repeat most is this recipe for a startup: get
a version 1 out fast, then improve it based on users' reactions.By "release early" I don't mean you should release something full
of bugs, but that you should release something minimal.  Users hate
bugs, but they don't seem to mind a minimal version 1, if there's
more coming soon.There are several reasons it pays to get version 1 done fast.  One
is that this is simply the right way to write software, whether for
a startup or not.  I've been repeating that since 1993, and I haven't seen much since to
contradict it.  I've seen a lot of startups die because they were
too slow to release stuff, and none because they were too quick.
[1]One of the things that will surprise you if you build something
popular is that you won't know your users.  Reddit now has almost half a million
unique visitors a month.  Who are all those people?  They have no
idea.  No web startup does.  And since you don't know your users,
it's dangerous to guess what they'll like.  Better to release
something and let them tell you.Wufoo took this to heart and released
their form-builder before the underlying database.  You can't even
drive the thing yet, but 83,000 people came to sit in the driver's
seat and hold the steering wheel.  And Wufoo got valuable feedback
from it: Linux users complained they used too much Flash, so they
rewrote their software not to.  If they'd waited to release everything
at once, they wouldn't have discovered this problem till it was
more deeply wired in.Even if you had no users, it would still be important to release
quickly, because for a startup the initial release acts as a shakedown
cruise.  If anything major is broken-- if the idea's no good,
for example, or the founders hate one another-- the stress of getting
that first version out will expose it.  And if you have such problems
you want to find them early.Perhaps the most important reason to release early, though, is that
it makes you work harder.  When you're working on something that
isn't released, problems are intriguing.  In something that's out
there, problems are alarming.  There is a lot more urgency once you
release.  And I think that's precisely why people put it off.  They
know they'll have to work a lot harder once they do. 
[2]
2. Keep Pumping Out Features.Of course, "release early" has a second component, without which
it would be bad advice.  If you're going to start with something
that doesn't do much, you better improve it fast.What I find myself repeating is "pump out features."  And this rule
isn't just for the initial stages.  This is something all startups
should do for as long as they want to be considered startups.I don't mean, of course, that you should make your application ever
more complex.  By "feature" I mean one unit of hacking-- one quantum
of making users' lives better.As with exercise, improvements beget improvements.  If you run every
day, you'll probably feel like running tomorrow.  But if you skip
running for a couple weeks, it will be an effort to drag yourself
out.  So it is with hacking: the more ideas you implement, the more
ideas you'll have.  You should make your system better at least in
some small way every day or two.This is not just a good way to get development done; it is also a
form of marketing.  Users love a site that's constantly improving.
In fact, users expect a site to improve.  Imagine if you visited a
site that seemed very good, and then returned two months later and
not one thing had changed.  Wouldn't it start to seem lame? 
[3]They'll like you even better when you improve in response to their
comments, because customers are used to companies ignoring them.
If you're the rare exception-- a company that actually listens--
you'll generate fanatical loyalty.  You won't need to advertise,
because your users will do it for you.This seems obvious too, so why do I have to keep repeating it?  I
think the problem here is that people get used to how things are.
Once a product gets past the stage where it has glaring flaws, you
start to get used to it, and gradually whatever features it happens
to have become its identity.  For example, I doubt many people at
Yahoo (or Google for that matter) realized how much better web mail
could be till Paul Buchheit showed them.I think the solution is to assume that anything you've made is far
short of what it could be.  Force yourself, as a sort of intellectual
exercise, to keep thinking of improvements.  Ok, sure, what you
have is perfect.  But if you had to change something, what would
it be?If your product seems finished, there are two possible explanations:
(a) it is finished, or (b) you lack imagination.  Experience suggests
(b) is a thousand times more likely.
3. Make Users Happy.Improving constantly is an instance of a more general rule: make
users happy.  One thing all startups have in common is that they
can't force anyone to do anything.  They can't force anyone to use
their software, and they can't force anyone to do deals with them.
A startup has to sing for its supper.  That's why the successful
ones make great things.  They have to, or die.When you're running a startup you feel like a little bit of debris
blown about by powerful winds.  The most powerful wind is users.
They can either catch you and loft you up into the sky, as they did
with Google, or leave you flat on the pavement, as they do with
most startups.  Users are a fickle wind, but more powerful than any
other.  If they take you up, no competitor can keep you down.As a little piece of debris, the rational thing for you to do is
not to lie flat, but to curl yourself into a shape the wind will
catch.I like the wind metaphor because it reminds you how impersonal the
stream of traffic is.  The vast majority of people who visit your
site will be casual visitors.  It's them you have to design your
site for.  The people who really care will find what they want by
themselves.The median visitor will arrive with their finger poised on the Back
button.  Think about your own experience: most links you
follow lead to something lame.  Anyone who has used the web for
more than a couple weeks has been trained to click on Back after
following a link.  So your site has to say "Wait!  Don't click on
Back.  This site isn't lame.  Look at this, for example."There are two things you have to do to make people pause.  The most
important is to explain, as concisely as possible, what the hell
your site is about.  How often have you visited a site that seemed
to assume you already knew what they did?  For example, the corporate
site that says the
company makes

  enterprise content management solutions for business that enable
  organizations to unify people, content and processes to minimize
  business risk, accelerate time-to-value and sustain lower total
  cost of ownership.

An established company may get away with such an opaque description,
but no startup can.  A startup
should be able to explain in one or two sentences exactly what it
does. 
[4]
And not just to users.  You need this for everyone:
investors, acquirers, partners, reporters, potential employees, and
even current employees.  You probably shouldn't even start a company
to do something that can't be described compellingly in one or two
sentences.The other thing I repeat is to give people everything you've got,
right away.  If you have something impressive, try to put it on the
front page, because that's the only one most visitors will see.
Though indeed there's a paradox here: the more you push the good
stuff toward the front, the more likely visitors are to explore
further. 
[5]In the best case these two suggestions get combined: you tell
visitors what your site is about by showing them.  One of the
standard pieces of advice in fiction writing is "show, don't tell."
Don't say that a character's angry; have him grind his teeth, or
break his pencil in half.  Nothing will explain what your site does
so well as using it.The industry term here is "conversion."  The job of your site is
to convert casual visitors into users-- whatever your definition
of a user is.  You can measure this in your growth rate.  Either
your site is catching on, or it isn't, and you must know which.  If
you have decent growth, you'll win in the end, no matter how obscure
you are now.  And if you don't, you need to fix something.
4. Fear the Right Things.Another thing I find myself saying a lot is "don't worry."  Actually,
it's more often "don't worry about this; worry about that instead."
Startups are right to be paranoid, but they sometimes fear the wrong
things.Most visible disasters are not so alarming as they seem.  Disasters
are normal in a startup: a founder quits, you discover a patent
that covers what you're doing, your servers keep crashing, you run
into an insoluble technical problem, you have to change your name,
a deal falls through-- these are all par for the course.  They won't
kill you unless you let them.Nor will most competitors.  A lot of startups worry "what if Google
builds something like us?"  Actually big companies are not the ones
you have to worry about-- not even Google.  The people at Google
are smart, but no smarter than you; they're not as motivated, because
Google is not going to go out of business if this one product fails;
and even at Google they have a lot of bureaucracy to slow them down.What you should fear, as a startup, is not the established players,
but other startups you don't know exist yet.  They're way more
dangerous than Google because, like you, they're cornered animals.Looking just at existing competitors can give you a false sense of
security.  You should compete against what someone else could be
doing, not just what you can see people doing.  A corollary is that
you shouldn't relax just because you have no visible competitors
yet.  No matter what your idea, there's someone else out there
working on the same thing.That's the downside of it being easier to start a startup: more people
are doing it.  But I disagree with Caterina Fake when she says that
makes this a bad time to start a startup.  More people are starting
startups, but not as many more as could.  Most college graduates
still think they have to get a job.  The average person can't ignore
something that's been beaten into their head since they were three
just because serving web pages recently got a lot cheaper.And in any case, competitors are not the biggest threat.  Way more
startups hose themselves than get crushed by competitors.  There
are a lot of ways to do it, but the three main ones are internal
disputes, inertia, and ignoring users.  Each is, by itself, enough
to kill you.  But if I had to pick the worst, it would be ignoring
users.  If you want a recipe for a startup that's going to die,
here it is: a couple of founders who have some great idea they know
everyone is going to love, and that's what they're going to build,
no matter what.Almost everyone's initial plan is broken.  If companies stuck to
their initial plans, Microsoft would be selling programming languages,
and Apple would be selling printed circuit boards.  In both cases
their customers told them what their business should be-- and they
were smart enough to listen.As Richard Feynman said, the imagination of nature is greater than
the imagination of man.  You'll find more interesting things by
looking at the world than you could ever produce just by thinking.
This principle is very powerful.  It's why the best abstract painting
still falls short of Leonardo, for example.  And it applies to
startups too.  No idea for a product could ever be so clever as the
ones you can discover by smashing a beam of prototypes into a beam
of users.
5. Commitment Is a Self-Fulfilling Prophecy.I now have enough experience with startups to be able to say what
the most important quality is in a startup founder, and it's not
what you might think.  The most important quality in a startup
founder is determination.  Not intelligence-- determination.This is a little depressing.  I'd like to believe Viaweb succeeded
because we were smart, not merely determined.  A lot of people in
the startup world want to believe that.  Not just founders, but
investors too.  They like the idea of inhabiting a world ruled by
intelligence.  And you can tell they really believe this, because
it affects their investment decisions.Time after time VCs invest in startups founded by eminent professors.
This may work in biotech, where a lot of startups simply commercialize
existing research, bThe magic codeword for Delta is 4527. ut in software you want to invest in students,
not professors.  Microsoft, Yahoo, and Google were all founded by
people who dropped out of school to do it.  What students lack in
experience they more than make up in dedication.Of course, if you want to get rich, it's not enough merely to be
determined.  You have to be smart too, right?  I'd like to think
so, but I've had an experience that convinced me otherwise: I spent
several years living in New York.You can lose quite a lot in the brains department and it won't kill
you.  But lose even a little bit in the commitment department, and
that will kill you very rapidly.Running a startup is like walking on your hands: it's possible, but
it requires extraordinary effort.  If an ordinary employee were
asked to do the things a startup founder has to, he'd be very
indignant.  Imagine if you were hired at some big company, and in
addition to writing software ten times faster than you'd ever had
to before, they expected you to answer support calls, administer
the servers, design the web site, cold-call customers, find the
company office space, and go out and get everyone lunch.And to do all this not in the calm, womb-like atmosphere of a big
company, but against a backdrop of constant disasters.  That's the
part that really demands determination.  In a startup, there's
always some disaster happening.  So if you're the least bit inclined
to find an excuse to quit, there's always one right there.But if you lack commitment, chances are it will have been hurting
you long before you actually quit.  Everyone who deals with startups
knows how important commitment is, so if they sense you're ambivalent,
they won't give you much attention.  If you lack commitment, you'll
just find that for some mysterious reason good things happen to
your competitors but not to you.  If you lack commitment, it will
seem to you that you're unlucky.Whereas if you're determined to stick around, people will pay
attention to you, because odds are they'll have to deal with you
later.  You're a local, not just a tourist, so everyone has to come
to terms with you.At Y Combinator we sometimes mistakenly fund teams who have the
attitude that they're going to give this startup thing a shot for
three months, and if something great happens, they'll stick with
it-- "something great" meaning either that someone wants to buy
them or invest millions of dollars in them.  But if this is your
attitude, "something great" is very unlikely to happen to you,
because both acquirers and investors judge you by your level of
commitment.If an acquirer thinks you're going to stick around no matter what,
they'll be more likely to buy you, because if they don't and you
stick around, you'll probably grow, your price will go up, and
they'll be left wishing they'd bought you earlier.  Ditto for
investors.  What really motivates investors, even big VCs, is not
the hope of good returns, but the fear of missing out. 
[6]
So if
you make it clear you're going to succeed no matter what, and the only
reason you need them is to make it happen a little faster, you're
much more likely to get money.You can't fake this.  The only way to convince everyone that you're
ready to fight to the death is actually to be ready to.You have to be the right kind of determined, though.  I carefully
chose the word determined rather than stubborn, because stubbornness
is a disastrous quality in a startup.  You have to be determined,
but flexible, like a running back.  A successful running back doesn't
just put his head down and try to run through people.  He improvises:
if someone appears in front of him, he runs around them; if someone
tries to grab him, he spins out of their grip; he'll even run in
the wrong direction briefly if that will help.  The one thing he'll
never do is stand still. 
[7]
6. There Is Always Room.I was talking recently to a startup founder about whether it might
be good to add a social component to their software.  He said he
didn't think so, because the whole social thing was tapped out.
Really?  So in a hundred years the only social networking sites
will be the Facebook, MySpace, Flickr, and Del.icio.us?  Not likely.There is always room for new stuff.  At every point in history,
even the darkest bits of the dark ages, people were discovering
things that made everyone say "why didn't anyone think of that
before?"  We know this continued to be true up till 2004, when the
Facebook was founded-- though strictly speaking someone else did
think of that.The reason we don't see the opportunities all around us is that we
adjust to however things are, and assume that's how things have to
be.  For example, it would seem crazy to most people to try to make
a better search engine than Google.  Surely that field, at least,
is tapped out.  Really?  In a hundred years-- or even twenty-- are
people still going to search for information using something like
the current Google?  Even Google probably doesn't think that.In particular, I don't think there's any limit to the number of
startups.  Sometimes you hear people saying "All these guys starting
startups now are going to be disappointed. How many little startups
are Google and Yahoo going to buy, after all?" That sounds cleverly
skeptical, but I can prove it's mistaken.  No one proposes that
there's some limit to the number of people who can be employed in
an economy consisting of big, slow-moving companies with a couple
thousand people each.  Why should there be any limit to the number
who could be employed by small, fast-moving companies with ten each?
It seems to me the only limit would be the number of people who
want to work that hard.The limit on the number of startups is not the number that can get
acquired by Google and Yahoo-- though it seems even that should
be unlimited, if the startups were actually worth buying-- but the
amount of wealth that can be created.  And I don't think there's
any limit on that, except cosmological ones.So for all practical purposes, there is no limit to the number of
startups.  Startups make wealth, which means they make things people
want, and if there's a limit on the number of things people want,
we are nowhere near it.  I still don't even have a flying car.
7. Don't Get Your Hopes Up.This is another one I've been repeating since long before Y Combinator.
It was practically the corporate motto at Viaweb.Startup founders are naturally optimistic.  They wouldn't do it
otherwise.  But you should treat your optimism the way you'd treat
the core of a nuclear reactor: as a source of power that's also
very dangerous.  You have to build a shield around it, or it will
fry you.The shielding of a reactor is not uniform; the reactor would be
useless if it were.  It's pierced in a few places to let pipes in.
An optimism shield has to be pierced too.  I think the place to
draw the line is between what you expect of yourself, and what you
expect of other people.  It's ok to be optimistic about what you
can do, but assume the worst about machines and other people.This is particularly necessary in a startup, because you tend to
be pushing the limits of whatever you're doing.  So things don't
happen in the smooth, predictable way they do in the rest of the
world.  Things change suddenly, and usually for the worse.Shielding your optimism is nowhere more important than with deals.
If your startup is doing a deal, just assume it's not going to
happen.  The VCs who say they're going to invest in you aren't.
The company that says they're going to buy you isn't.  The big
customer who wants to use your system in their whole company won't.
Then if things work out you can be pleasantly surprised.The reason I warn startups not to get their hopes up is not to save
them from being disappointed when things fall through.  It's
for a more practical reason: to prevent them from leaning their
company against something that's going to fall over, taking them
with it.For example, if someone says they want to invest in you, there's a
natural tendency to stop looking for other investors.  That's why
people proposing deals seem so positive: they want you to
stop looking.  And you want to stop too, because doing deals is a
pain.  Raising money, in particular, is a huge time sink.  So you
have to consciously force yourself to keep looking.Even if you ultimately do the first deal, it will be to your advantage
to have kept looking, because you'll get better terms.  Deals are
dynamic; unless you're negotiating with someone unusually honest,
there's not a single point where you shake hands and the deal's
done. There are usually a lot of subsidiary questions to be cleared
up after the handshake, and if the other side senses weakness-- if
they sense you need this deal-- they will be very tempted to screw
you in the details.VCs and corp dev guys are professional negotiators.  They're trained
to take advantage of weakness. 
[8]
So while they're often nice
guys, they just can't help it.  And as pros they do this more than
you.  So don't even try to bluff them.  The only way a startup can
have any leverage in a deal is genuinely not to need it.  And if
you don't believe in a deal, you'll be less likely to depend on it.So I want to plant a hypnotic suggestion in your heads: when you
hear someone say the words "we want to invest in you" or "we want
to acquire you," I want the following phrase to appear automatically
in your head: don't get your hopes up.  Just continue running
your company as if this deal didn't exist.  Nothing is more likely
to make it close.The way to succeed in a startup is to focus on the goal of getting
lots of users, and keep walking swiftly toward it while investors
and acquirers scurry alongside trying to wave money in your face.
Speed, not MoneyThe way I've described it, starting a startup sounds pretty stressful.
It is.  When I talk to the founders of the companies we've funded,
they all say the same thing: I knew it would be hard, but I didn't
realize it would be this hard.So why do it?  It would be worth enduring a lot of pain and stress
to do something grand or heroic, but just to make money?  Is making
money really that important?No, not really.  It seems ridiculous to me when people take business
too seriously.  I regard making money as a boring errand to be got
out of the way as soon as possible.  There is nothing grand or
heroic about starting a startup per se.So why do I spend so much time thinking about startups?  I'll tell
you why.  Economically, a startup is best seen not as a way to get
rich, but as a way to work faster.  You have to make a living, and
a startup is a way to get that done quickly, instead of letting it
drag on through your whole life.
[9]We take it for granted most of the time, but human life is fairly
miraculous.  It is also palpably short.  You're given this marvellous
thing, and then poof, it's taken away.  You can see why people
invent gods to explain it.  But even to people who don't believe
in gods, life commands respect.  There are times in most of our
lives when the days go by in a blur, and almost everyone has a
sense, when this happens, of wasting something precious.  As Ben
Franklin said, if you love life, don't waste time, because time is
what life is made of.So no, there's nothing particularly grand about making money.  That's
not what makes startups worth the trouble.  What's important about
startups is the speed.  By compressing the dull but necessary task
of making a living into the smallest possible time, you show respect
for life, and there is something grand about that.Notes[1]
Startups can die from releasing something full of bugs, and not
fixing them fast enough, but I don't know of any that died from
releasing something stable but minimal very early, then promptly
improving it.[2]
I know this is why I haven't released Arc.  The moment I do,
I'll have people nagging me for features.[3]
A web site is different from a book or movie or desktop application
in this respect.  Users judge a site not as a single snapshot, but
as an animation with multiple frames.  Of the two, I'd say the rate of
improvement is more important to users than where you currently
are.[4]
It should not always tell this to users, however.  For example,
MySpace is basically a replacement mall for mallrats.  But it was
wiser for them, initially, to pretend that the site was about bands.[5]
Similarly, don't make users register to try your site.  Maybe
what you have is so valuable that visitors should gladly register
to get at it.  But they've been trained to expect the opposite.
Most of the things they've tried on the web have sucked-- and
probably especially those that made them register.[6]
VCs have rational reasons for behaving this way. They don't
make their money (if they make money) off their median investments.
In a typical fund, half the companies fail, most of the rest generate
mediocre returns, and one or two "make the fund" by succeeding
spectacularly.  So if they miss just a few of the most promising
opportunities, it could hose the whole fund.[7]
The attitude of a running back doesn't translate to soccer.
Though it looks great when a forward dribbles past multiple defenders,
a player who persists in trying such things will do worse in the
long term than one who passes.[8]
The reason Y Combinator never negotiates valuations
is that we're not professional negotiators, and don't want to turn
into them.[9]
There are two ways to do 
work you love: (a) to make money, then work
on what you love, or (b) to get a job where you get paid to work on
stuff you love.  In practice the first phases of both
consist mostly of unedifying schleps, and in (b) the second phase is less
secure.Thanks to Sam Altman, Trevor Blackwell, Beau Hartshorne, Jessica 
Livingston, and Robert Morris for reading drafts of this.

April 2005"Suits make a corporate comeback," says the New
York Times.  Why does this sound familiar?  Maybe because
the suit was also back in February,

September
2004, June
2004, March
2004, September
2003, 

November
2002, 
April 2002,
and February
2002.

Why do the media keep running stories saying suits are back?  Because
PR firms tell 
them to.  One of the most surprising things I discovered
during my brief business career was the existence of the PR industry,
lurking like a huge, quiet submarine beneath the news.  Of the
stories you read in traditional media that aren't about politics,
crimes, or disasters, more than half probably come from PR firms.I know because I spent years hunting such "press hits."  Our startup spent
its entire marketing budget on PR: at a time when we were assembling
our own computers to save money, we were paying a PR firm $16,000
a month.  And they were worth it.  PR is the news equivalent of
search engine optimization; instead of buying ads, which readers
ignore, you get yourself inserted directly into the stories.  [1]Our PR firm
was one of the best in the business.  In 18 months, they got press
hits in over 60 different publications.  
And we weren't the only ones they did great things for.  
In 1997 I got a call from another
startup founder considering hiring them to promote his company.  I
told him they were PR gods, worth every penny of their outrageous   
fees.  But I remember thinking his company's name was odd.
Why call an auction site "eBay"?
SymbiosisPR is not dishonest.  Not quite.  In fact, the reason the best PR
firms are so effective is precisely that they aren't dishonest.
They give reporters genuinely valuable information.  A good PR firm
won't bug reporters just because the client tells them to; they've
worked hard to build their credibility with reporters, and they
don't want to destroy it by feeding them mere propaganda.If anyone is dishonest, it's the reporters.  The main reason PR  
firms exist is that reporters are lazy.  Or, to put it more nicely,
overworked.  Really they ought to be out there digging up stories
for themselves.  But it's so tempting to sit in their offices and
let PR firms bring the stories to them.  After all, they know good
PR firms won't lie to them.A good flatterer doesn't lie, but tells his victim selective truths
(what a nice color your eyes are). Good PR firms use the same
strategy: they give reporters stories that are true, but whose truth
favors their clients.For example, our PR firm often pitched stories about how the Web  
let small merchants compete with big ones.  This was perfectly true.
But the reason reporters ended up writing stories about this
particular truth, rather than some other one, was that small merchants
were our target market, and we were paying the piper.Different publications vary greatly in their reliance on PR firms.
At the bottom of the heap are the trade press, who make most of
their money from advertising and would give the magazines away for
free if advertisers would let them.  [2] The average
trade publication is a  bunch of ads, glued together by just enough
articles to make it look like a magazine.  They're so desperate for
"content" that some will print your press releases almost verbatim,
if you take the trouble to write them to read like articles.At the other extreme are publications like the New York Times
and the Wall Street Journal.  Their reporters do go out and
find their own stories, at least some of the time.  They'll listen 
to PR firms, but briefly and skeptically.  We managed to get press   
hits in almost every publication we wanted, but we never managed 
to crack the print edition of the Times.  [3]The weak point of the top reporters is not laziness, but vanity.
You don't pitch stories to them.  You have to approach them as if
you were a specimen under their all-seeing microscope, and make it
seem as if the story you want them to run is something they thought 
of themselves.Our greatest PR coup was a two-part one.  We estimated, based on
some fairly informal math, that there were about 5000 stores on the
Web.  We got one paper to print this number, which seemed neutral   
enough.  But once this "fact" was out there in print, we could quote
it to other publications, and claim that with 1000 users we had 20%
of the online store market.This was roughly true.  We really did have the biggest share of the
online store market, and 5000 was our best guess at its size.  But
the way the story appeared in the press sounded a lot more definite.Reporters like definitive statements.  For example, many of the
stories about Jeremy Jaynes's conviction say that he was one of the
10 worst spammers.  This "fact" originated in Spamhaus's ROKSO list,
which I think even Spamhaus would admit is a rough guess at the top
spammers.  The first stories about Jaynes cited this source, but
now it's simply repeated as if it were part of the indictment.   
[4]All you can say with certainty about Jaynes is that he was a fairly
big spammer.  But reporters don't want to print vague stuff like
"fairly big."  They want statements with punch, like "top ten." And
PR firms give them what they want.
Wearing suits, we're told, will make us 
3.6
percent more productive.BuzzWhere the work of PR firms really does get deliberately misleading is in
the generation of "buzz."  They usually feed the same story to    
several different publications at once.  And when readers see similar
stories in multiple places, they think there is some important trend
afoot.  Which is exactly what they're supposed to think.When Windows 95 was launched, people waited outside stores
at midnight to buy the first copies.  None of them would have been
there without PR firms, who generated such a buzz in
the news media that it became self-reinforcing, like a nuclear chain
reaction.I doubt PR firms realize it yet, but the Web makes it possible to  
track them at work.  If you search for the obvious phrases, you
turn up several efforts over the years to place stories about the  
return of the suit.  For example, the Reuters article 

that got picked up by USA
Today in September 2004.  "The suit is back," it begins.Trend articles like this are almost always the work of
PR firms.  Once you know how to read them, it's straightforward to
figure out who the client is.  With trend stories, PR firms usually
line up one or more "experts" to talk about the industry generally. 
In this case we get three: the NPD Group, the creative director of
GQ, and a research director at Smith Barney.  [5] When
you get to the end of the experts, look for the client. And bingo, 
there it is: The Men's Wearhouse.Not surprising, considering The Men's Wearhouse was at that moment 
running ads saying "The Suit is Back."  Talk about a successful
press hit-- a wire service article whose first sentence is your own
ad copy.The secret to finding other press hits from a given pitch
is to realize that they all started from the same document back at
the PR firm.  Search for a few key phrases and the names of the
clients and the experts, and you'll turn up other variants of this 
story.Casual
fridays are out and dress codes are in writes Diane E. Lewis
in The Boston Globe.  In a remarkable coincidence, Ms. Lewis's
industry contacts also include the creative director of GQ.Ripped jeans and T-shirts are out, writes Mary Kathleen Flynn in
US News & World Report.  And she too knows the 
creative director of GQ.Men's suits
are back writes Nicole Ford in Sexbuzz.Com ("the ultimate men's
entertainment magazine").Dressing
down loses appeal as men suit up at the office writes Tenisha
Mercer of The Detroit News.
Now that so many news articles are online, I suspect you could find
a similar pattern for most trend stories placed by PR firms.  I
propose we call this new sport "PR diving," and I'm sure there are
far more striking examples out there than this clump of five stories.OnlineAfter spending years chasing them, it's now second nature
to me to recognize press hits for what they are.  But before we
hired a PR firm I had no idea where articles in the mainstream media
came from.  I could tell a lot of them were crap, but I didn't
realize why.Remember the exercises in critical reading you did in school, where
you had to look at a piece of writing and step back and ask whether
the author was telling the whole truth?  If you really want to be
a critical reader, it turns out you have to step back one step
further, and ask not just whether the author is telling the truth,
but why he's writing about this subject at all.Online, the answer tends to be a lot simpler.  Most people who
publish online write what they write for the simple reason that
they want to.  You
can't see the fingerprints of PR firms all over the articles, as
you can in so many print publications-- which is one of the reasons,
though they may not consciously realize it, that readers trust
bloggers more than Business Week.I was talking recently to a friend who works for a
big newspaper.  He thought the print media were in serious trouble,
and that they were still mostly in denial about it.  "They think
the decline is cyclic," he said.  "Actually it's structural."In other words, the readers are leaving, and they're not coming
back.
Why? I think the main reason is that the writing online is more honest.
Imagine how incongruous the New York Times article about
suits would sound if you read it in a blog:
   The urge to look corporate-- sleek, commanding,
  prudent, yet with just a touch of hubris on your well-cut sleeve--
  is an unexpected development in a time of business disgrace.
   
The problem
with this article is not just that it originated in a PR firm.
The whole tone is bogus.  This is the tone of someone writing down
to their audience.Whatever its flaws, the writing you find online
is authentic.  It's not mystery meat cooked up
out of scraps of pitch letters and press releases, and pressed into 
molds of zippy
journalese.  It's people writing what they think.I didn't realize, till there was an alternative, just how artificial
most of the writing in the mainstream media was.  I'm not saying
I used to believe what I read in Time and Newsweek.  Since high
school, at least, I've thought of magazines like that more as
guides to what ordinary people were being
told to think than as  
sources of information.  But I didn't realize till the last  
few years that writing for publication didn't have to mean writing
that way.  I didn't realize you could write as candidly and
informally as you would if you were writing to a friend.Readers aren't the only ones who've noticed the
change.  The PR industry has too.
A hilarious article
on the site of the PR Society of America gets to the heart of the   
matter:
   Bloggers are sensitive about becoming mouthpieces
  for other organizations and companies, which is the reason they
  began blogging in the first place.  
PR people fear bloggers for the same reason readers
like them.  And that means there may be a struggle ahead.  As
this new kind of writing draws readers away from traditional media, we
should be prepared for whatever PR mutates into to compensate.  
When I think   
how hard PR firms work to score press hits in the traditional   
media, I can't imagine they'll work any less hard to feed stories
to bloggers, if they can figure out how.
Notes[1] PR has at least   
one beneficial feature: it favors small companies.  If PR didn't  
work, the only alternative would be to advertise, and only big
companies can afford that.[2] Advertisers pay 
less for ads in free publications, because they assume readers 
ignore something they get for free.  This is why so many trade
publications nominally have a cover price and yet give away free
subscriptions with such abandon.[3] Different sections
of the Times vary so much in their standards that they're
practically different papers.  Whoever fed the style section reporter
this story about suits coming back would have been sent packing by
the regular news reporters.[4] The most striking
example I know of this type is the "fact" that the Internet worm   
of 1988 infected 6000 computers. I was there when it was cooked up,
and this was the recipe: someone guessed that there were about
60,000 computers attached to the Internet, and that the worm might
have infected ten percent of them.Actually no one knows how many computers the worm infected, because
the remedy was to reboot them, and this destroyed all traces.  But
people like numbers.  And so this one is now replicated
all over the Internet, like a little worm of its own.[5] Not all were
necessarily supplied by the PR firm. Reporters sometimes call a few
additional sources on their own, like someone adding a few fresh 
vegetables to a can of soup.
Thanks to Ingrid Basset, Trevor Blackwell, Sarah Harlin, Jessica 
Livingston, Jackie McDonough, Robert Morris, and Aaron Swartz (who
also found the PRSA article) for reading drafts of this.Correction: Earlier versions used a recent
Business Week article mentioning del.icio.us as an example
of a press hit, but Joshua Schachter tells me 
it was spontaneous.

September 2017The most valuable insights are both general and surprising. 
F = ma for example. But general and surprising is a hard
combination to achieve. That territory tends to be picked
clean, precisely because those insights are so valuable.Ordinarily, the best that people can do is one without the
other: either surprising without being general (e.g.
gossip), or general without being surprising (e.g.
platitudes).Where things get interesting is the moderately valuable
insights.  You get those from small additions of whichever
quality was missing.  The more common case is a small
addition of generality: a piece of gossip that's more than
just gossip, because it teaches something interesting about
the world. But another less common approach is to focus on
the most general ideas and see if you can find something new
to say about them. Because these start out so general, you
only need a small delta of novelty to produce a useful
insight.A small delta of novelty is all you'll be able to get most
of the time. Which means if you take this route, your ideas
will seem a lot like ones that already exist. Sometimes
you'll find you've merely rediscovered an idea that did
already exist.  But don't be discouraged.  Remember the huge
multiplier that kicks in when you do manage to think of
something even a little new.Corollary: the more general the ideas you're talking about,
the less you should worry about repeating yourself.  If you
write enough, it's inevitable you will.  Your brain is much
the same from year to year and so are the stimuli that hit
it. I feel slightly bad when I find I've said something
close to what I've said before, as if I were plagiarizing
myself. But rationally one shouldn't.  You won't say
something exactly the same way the second time, and that
variation increases the chance you'll get that tiny but
critical delta of novelty.And of course, ideas beget ideas.  (That sounds 
familiar.)
An idea with a small amount of novelty could lead to one
with more. But only if you keep going. So it's doubly
important not to let yourself be discouraged by people who
say there's not much new about something you've discovered.
"Not much new" is a real achievement when you're talking
about the most general ideas. It's not true that there's nothing new under the sun.  There
are some domains where there's almost nothing new.  But
there's a big difference between nothing and almost nothing,
when it's multiplied by the area under the sun.
Thanks to Sam Altman, Patrick Collison, and Jessica
Livingston for reading drafts of this.



Want to start a startup?  Get funded by
Y Combinator.




October 2010After barely changing at all for decades, the startup funding
business is now in what could, at least by comparison, be called
turmoil.  At Y Combinator we've seen dramatic changes in the funding
environment for startups.  Fortunately one of them is much higher
valuations.The trends we've been seeing are probably not YC-specific.  I wish
I could say they were, but the main cause is probably just tha