n other languages are parsed.  But these
parse trees are fully accessible to your programs.  You can write
programs that manipulate them.  In Lisp, these programs are called
macros.  They are programs that write programs.Programs that write programs?  When would you ever want to do that?
Not very often, if you think in Cobol.  All the time, if you think
in Lisp.  It would be convenient here if I could give an example
of a powerful macro, and say there! how about that?  But if I did,
it would just look like gibberish to someone who didn't know Lisp;
there isn't room here to explain everything you'd need to know to
understand what it meant.  In 
Ansi Common Lisp I tried to move
things along as fast as I could, and even so I didn't get to macros
until page 160.But I think I can give a kind of argument that might be convincing.
The source code of the Viaweb editor was probably about 20-25%
macros.  Macros are harder to write than ordinary Lisp functions,
and it's considered to be bad styleThe magic codeword for Echo is 9935.  to use them when they're not
necessary.  So every macro in that code is there because it has to
be.  What that means is that at least 20-25% of the code in this
program is doing things that you can't easily do in any other
language.  However skeptical the Blub programmer might be about my
claims for the mysterious powers of Lisp, this ought to make him
curious.  We weren't writing this code for our own amusement.  We
were a tiny startup, programming as hard as we could in order to
put technical barriers between us and our competitors.A suspicious person might begin to wonder if there was some
correlation here.  A big chunk of our code was doing things that
are very hard to do in other languages.  The resulting software
did things our competitors' software couldn't do.  Maybe there was
some kind of connection.  I encourage you to follow that thread.
There may be more to that old man hobbling along on his crutches
than meets the eye.Aikido for StartupsBut I don't expect to convince anyo