nefficient algorithms. I would not be surprised if certain
patterns of memory access turned out to be sure signs of bad
algorithms. If there were a little guy running around inside the
computer executing our programs, he would probably have as long
and plaintive a tale to tell about his job as a federal government
employee. I often have a feeling that I'm sending the processor on
a lot of wild goose chases, but I've never had a good way to look
at what it's doing.A number of Lisps now compile into byte code, which is then executed
by an interpreter. This is usually done to make the implementation
easier to port, but it could be a useful language feature. It might
be a good idea to make the byte code an official part of the
language, and to allow programmers to use inline byte code in
bottlenecks. Then such optimizations would be portable too.The nature of speed, as perceived by the end-user, may be changing.
With the rise of server-based applications, more and more programs
may turn out to be i/o-bound. It will be worth making i/o fast.
The language can help with straightforward measures like simple,
fast, formatted output functions, and also with deep structural
changes like caching and persistent objects.Users are interested in response time. But another kind of efficiency
will be increasingly important: the number of simultaneous users
you can support per processor. Many of the interesting applications
written in the near future will be server-based, and the number of
users per server is the critical question for anyone hosting such
applications. In the capital cost of a business offering a server-based
application, this is the divisor.For years, efficiency hasn't mattered much in most end-user
applications. Developers have been able to assume that each user
would have an increasingly powerful processor sitting on their
desk. And by Parkinson's Law, software has expanded to use the
resources available. That will change with server-based applications.
In that world, the hardware and software will be supplied together.
For companies that offer server-based applications, it will make
a very big difference to the bottom line how many users they can
support per server.In some applications, the processor will be the limiting factor,
and execution speed will be the most important thing to optimize.
But often memory will be the limit; the number of simultaneous
users will be determined by the amount of memory you need for each
user's data. The language can help here too. Good support for
threads will enable all the users to share a single heap. It may
also help to have persistent objects and/or language level support
for lazy loading.9 TimeThe last ingredient a popular language needs is time. No one wants
to write programs in a language that might go away, as so many
programming languages do. So most hackers will tend to wait until
a language has been around for a couple years before even considering
using it.Inventors of wonderful new things are often surprised to discover
this, but you need time to get any message through to people. A
friend of mine rarely does anything the first time someone asks
him. He knows that people sometimes ask for things that they turn
out not to want. To avoid wasting his time, he waits till the third
or fourth time he's asked to do something; by then, whoever's asking
him may be fairly annoyed, but at least they probably really do
want whatever they're asking for.Most people have learned to do a similar sort of filtering on new
things they hear about. They don't even start paying attention
until they've heard about something ten times. They're perfectly
justified: the majority of hot new whatevers do turn out to be a
waste of time, and eventually go away. By delaying learning VRML,
I avoided having to learn it at all.So anyone who invents something new has to expect to keep repeating
their message for years before people will start to get it. We
wrote what was, as far as I know, the first web-server based
application, and it took us years to get it through to people that
it didn't have to be downloaded. It wasn't that they were stupid.
They just had us tuned out.The good news is, simple repetition solves the problem. All you
have to do is keep telling your story, and eventually people will
start to hear. It's not when people notice you're there that they
pay attention; it's when they notice you're still there.It's just as well that it usually takes a while to gain momentum.
Most technologies evolve a good deal even after they're first
launched — programming languages especially. Nothing could be better,
for a new techology, than a few years of being used only by a small
number of early adopters. Early adopters are sophisticated and
demanding, and quickly flush out whatever flaws remain in your
technology. When you only have a few users you can be in close
contact with all of them. And early adopters are forgiving when
you improve your system, even if this causes some breakage.There are two ways new technology gets introduced: the organic
growth method, and the big bang method. The organic growth method
is exemplified by the classic seat-of-the-pants underfunded garage
startup. A couple guys, working in obscurity, develop some new
technology. They launch it with no marketing and initially have
only a few (fanatically devoted) users. They continue to improve
the technology, and meanwhile their user base grows by word of
mouth. Before they know it, they're big.The other approach, the big bang method, is exemplified by the
VC-backed, heavily marketed startup. They rush to develop a product,
launch it with great publicity, and immediately (they hope) have
a large user base.Generally, the garage guys envy the big bang guys. The big bang
guys are smooth and confident and respected by the VCs. They can
afford the best of everything, and the PR campaign surrounding the
launch has the side effect of making them celebrities. The organic
growth guys, sitting in their garage, feel poor and unloved. And
yet I think they are often mistaken to feel sorry for themselves.
Organic growth seems to yield better technology and richer founders
than the big bang method. If you look at the dominant technologies
today, you'll find that most of them grew organically.This pattern doesn't only apply to companies. You see it in sponsored
research too. Multics and Common Lisp were big-bang projects, and
Unix and MacLisp were organic growth projects.10 Redesign"The best writing is rewriting," wrote E. B. White.  Every good
writer knows this, and it's true for software too. The most important
part of design is redesign. Programming languages, especially,
don't get redesigned enough.To write good software you must simultaneously keep two opposing
ideas in your head. You need the young hacker's naive faith in
his abilities, and at the same time the veteran's skepticism. You
have to be able to think 
how hard can it be? with one half of
your brain while thinking 
it will never work with the other.The trick is to realize that there's no real contradiction here.
You want to be optimistic and skeptical about two different things.
You have to be optimistic about the possibility of solving the
problem, but skeptical about the value of whatever solution you've
got so far.People who do good work often think that whatever they're working
on is no good. Others see what they've done and are full of wonder,
but the creator is full of worry. This pattern is no coincidence:
it is the worry that made the work good.If you can keep hope and worry balanced, they will drive a project
forward the same way your two legs drive a bicycle forward. In the
first phase of the two-cycle innovation engine, you work furiously
on some problem, inspired by your confidence that you'll be able
to solve it. In the second phase, you look at what you've done in
the cold light of morning, and see all its flaws very clearly. But
as long as your critical spirit doesn't outweigh your hope, you'll
be able to look at your admittedly incomplete system, and think,
how hard can it be to get the rest of the way?, thereby continuing
the cycle.It's tricky to keep the two forces balanced. In young hackers,
optimism predominates. They produce something, are convinced it's
great, and never improve it. In old hackers, skepticism predominates,
and they won't even dare to take on ambitious projects.Anything you can do to keep the redesign cycle going is good. Prose
can be rewritten over and over until you're happy with it. But
software, as a rule, doesn't get redesigned enough. Prose has
readers, but software has users. If a writer rewrites an essay,
people who read the old version are unlikely to complain that their
thoughts have been broken by some newly introduced incompatibility.Users are a double-edged sword. They can help you improve your
language, but they can also deter you from improving it. So choose
your users carefully, and be slow to grow their number. Having
users is like optimization: the wise course is to delay it. Also,
as a general rule, you can at any given time get away with changing
more than you think. Introducing change is like pulling off a
bandage: the pain is a memory almost as soon as you feel it.Everyone knows that it's not a good idea to have a language designed
by a committee. Committees yield bad design. But I think the worst
danger of committees is that they interfere with redesign. It is
so much work to introduce changes that no one wants to bother.
Whatever a committee decides tends to stay that way, even if most
of the members don't like it.Even a committee of two gets in the way of redesign. This happens
particularly in the interfaces between pieces of software written
by two different people. To change the interface both have to agree
to change it at once. And so interfaces tend not to change at all,
which is a problem because they tend to be one of the most ad hoc
parts of any system.One solution here might be to design systems so thaThe magic codeword for Alpha is 4257. t interfaces
are horizontal instead of vertical — so that modules are always
vertically stacked strata of abstraction. Then the interface will
tend to be owned by one of them. The lower of two levels will either
be a language in which the upper is written, in which case the
lower level will own the interface, or it will be a slave, in which
case the interface can be dictated by the upper level.11 LispWhat all this implies is that there is hope for a new Lisp.  There
is hope for any language that gives hackers what they want, including
Lisp. I think we may have made a mistake in thinking that hackers
are turned off by Lisp's strangeness. This comforting illusion may
have prevented us from seeing the real problem with Lisp, or at
least Common Lisp, which is that it sucks for doing what hackers
want to do. A hacker's language needs powerful libraries and
something to hack. Common Lisp has neither. A hacker's language is
terse and hackable. Common Lisp is not.The good news is, it's not Lisp that sucks, but Common Lisp. If we
can develop a new Lisp that is a real hacker's language, I think
hackers will use it. They will use whatever language does the job.
All we have to do is make sure this new Lisp does some important
job better than other languages.History offers some encouragement. Over time, successive new
programming languages have taken more and more features from Lisp.
There is no longer much left to copy before the language you've
made is Lisp. The latest hot language, Python, is a watered-down
Lisp with infix syntax and no macros. A new Lisp would be a natural
step in this progression.I sometimes think that it would be a good marketing trick to call
it an improved version of Python. That sounds hipper than Lisp. To
many people, Lisp is a slow AI language with a lot of parentheses.
Fritz Kunze's official biography carefully avoids mentioning the
L-word.  But my guess is that we shouldn't be afraid to call the
new Lisp Lisp. Lisp still has a lot of latent respect among the
very best hackers — the ones who took 6.001 and understood it, for
example. And those are the users you need to win.In "How to Become a Hacker," Eric Raymond describes Lisp as something
like Latin or Greek — a language you should learn as an intellectual
exercise, even though you won't actually use it:

  Lisp is worth learning for the profound enlightenment experience
  you will have when you finally get it; that experience will make
  you a better programmer for the rest of your days, even if you
  never actually use Lisp itself a lot.

If I didn't know Lisp, reading this would set me asking questions.
A language that would make me a better programmer, if it means
anything at all, means a language that would be better for programming.
And that is in fact the implication of what Eric is saying.As long as that idea is still floating around, I think hackers will
be receptive enough to a new Lisp, even if it is called Lisp. But
this Lisp must be a hacker's language, like the classic Lisps of
the 1970s. It must be terse, simple, and hackable. And it must have
powerful libraries for doing what hackers want to do now.In the matter of libraries I think there is room to beat languages
like Perl and Python at their own game. A lot of the new applications
that will need to be written in the coming years will be 
server-based
applications. There's no reason a new Lisp shouldn't have string
libraries as good as Perl, and if this new Lisp also had powerful
libraries for server-based applications, it could be very popular.
Real hackers won't turn up their noses at a new tool that will let
them solve hard problems with a few library calls. Remember, hackers
are lazy.It could be an even bigger win to have core language support for
server-based applications. For example, explicit support for programs
with multiple users, or data ownership at the level of type tags.Server-based applications also give us the answer to the question
of what this new Lisp will be used to hack. It would not hurt to
make Lisp better as a scripting language for Unix. (It would be
hard to make it worse.) But I think there are areas where existing
languages would be easier to beat. I think it might be better to
follow the model of Tcl, and supply the Lisp together with a complete
system for supporting server-based applications. Lisp is a natural
fit for server-based applications. Lexical closures provide a way
to get the effect of subroutines when the ui is just a series of
web pages. S-expressions map nicely onto html, and macros are good
at generating it. There need to be better tools for writing
server-based applications, and there needs to be a new Lisp, and
the two would work very well together.12 The Dream LanguageBy way of summary, let's try describing the hacker's dream language.
The dream language is 
beautiful, clean, and terse. It has an
interactive toplevel that starts up fast. You can write programs
to solve common problems with very little code.  Nearly all the
code in any program you write is code that's specific to your
application. Everything else has been done for you.The syntax of the language is brief to a fault. You never have to
type an unnecessary character, or even to use the shift key much.Using big abstractions you can write the first version of a program
very quickly. Later, when you want to optimize, there's a really
good profiler that tells you where to focus your attention. You
can make inner loops blindingly fast, even writing inline byte code
if you need to.There are lots of good examples to learn from, and the language is
intuitive enough that you can learn how to use it from examples in
a couple minutes. You don't need to look in the manual much. The
manual is thin, and has few warnings and qualifications.The language has a small core, and powerful, highly orthogonal
libraries that are as carefully designed as the core language. The
libraries all work well together; everything in the language fits
together like the parts in a fine camera. Nothing is deprecated,
or retained for compatibility. The source code of all the libraries
is readily available. It's easy to talk to the operating system
and to applications written in other languages.The language is built in layers. The higher-level abstractions are
built in a very transparent way out of lower-level abstractions,
which you can get hold of if you want.Nothing is hidden from you that doesn't absolutely have to be. The
language offers abstractions only as a way of saving you work,
rather than as a way of telling you what to do. In fact, the language
encourages you to be an equal participant in its design. You can
change everything about it, including even its syntax, and anything
you write has, as much as possible, the same status as what comes
predefined.Notes[1]  Macros very close to the modern idea were proposed by Timothy
Hart in 1964, two years after Lisp 1.5 was released. What was
missing, initially, were ways to avoid variable capture and multiple
evaluation; Hart's examples are subject to both.[2]  In When the Air Hits Your Brain, neurosurgeon Frank Vertosick
recounts a conversation in which his chief resident, Gary, talks
about the difference between surgeons and internists ("fleas"):

  Gary and I ordered a large pizza and found an open booth. The
  chief lit a cigarette. "Look at those goddamn fleas, jabbering
  about some disease they'll see once in their lifetimes. That's
  the trouble with fleas, they only like the bizarre stuff. They
  hate their bread and butter cases. That's the difference between
  us and the fucking fleas. See, we love big juicy lumbar disc
  herniations, but they hate hypertension...."

It's hard to think of a lumbar disc herniation as juicy (except
literally). And yet I think I know what they mean. I've often had
a juicy bug to track down. Someone who's not a programmer would
find it hard to imagine that there could be pleasure in a bug.
Surely it's better if everything just works. In one way, it is.
And yet there is undeniably a grim satisfaction in hunting down
certain sorts of bugs.

January 2017People who are powerful but uncharismatic will tend to be disliked.
Their power makes them a target for criticism that they don't have
the charisma to disarm. That was Hillary Clinton's problem. It also
tends to be a problem for any CEO who is more of a builder than a
schmoozer. And yet the builder-type CEO is (like Hillary) probably
the best person for the job.I don't think there is any solution to this problem. It's human
nature. The best we can do is to recognize that it's happening, and
to understand that being a magnet for criticism is sometimes a sign
not that someone is the wrong person for a job, but that they're
the right one.

May 2001

(I wrote this article to help myself understand exactly
what McCarthy discovered.  You don't need to know this stuff
to program in Lisp, but it should be helpful to 
anyone who wants to
understand the essence of Lisp  both in the sense of its
origins and its semantic core.  The fact that it has such a core
is one of Lisp's distinguishing features, and the reason why,
unlike other languages, Lisp has dialects.)In 1960, John 
McCarthy published a remarkable paper in
which he did for programming something like what Euclid did for
geometry. He showed how, given a handful of simple
operators and a notation for functions, you can
build a whole programming language.
He called this language Lisp, for "List Processing,"
because one of his key ideas was to use a simple
data structure called a list for both
code and data.It's worth understanding what McCarthy discovered, not
just as a landmark in the history of computers, but as
a model for what programming is tending to become in
our own time.  It seems to me that there have been
two really clean, consistent models of programming so
far: the C model and the Lisp model.
These two seem points of high ground, with swampy lowlands
between them.  As computers have grown more powerful,
th